---
pmid: '22939624'
title: Quantitative analysis of HSP90-client interactions reveals principles of substrate
  recognition.
authors:
- Taipale M
- Krykbaeva I
- Koeva M
- Kayatekin C
- Westover KD
- Karras GI
- Lindquist S
journal: Cell
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3894786
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.047
---

# Quantitative analysis of HSP90-client interactions reveals principles of substrate recognition.
**Authors:** Taipale M, Krykbaeva I, Koeva M, Kayatekin C, Westover KD, Karras GI, Lindquist S
**Journal:** Cell (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.047](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.047)
**PMC:** [PMC3894786](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3894786/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2012 Aug 31;150(5):987-1001. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.047.

Quantitative analysis of HSP90-client interactions reveals principles of 
substrate recognition.

Taipale M(1), Krykbaeva I, Koeva M, Kayatekin C, Westover KD, Karras GI, 
Lindquist S.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

HSP90 is a molecular chaperone that associates with numerous substrate proteins 
called clients. It plays many important roles in human biology and medicine, but 
determinants of client recognition by HSP90 have remained frustratingly elusive. 
We systematically and quantitatively surveyed most human kinases, transcription 
factors, and E3 ligases for interaction with HSP90 and its cochaperone CDC37. 
Unexpectedly, many more kinases than transcription factors bound HSP90. CDC37 
interacted with kinases, but not with transcription factors or E3 ligases. 
HSP90::kinase interactions varied continuously over a 100-fold range and 
provided a platform to study client protein recognition. In wild-type clients, 
HSP90 did not bind particular sequence motifs, but rather associated with 
intrinsically unstable kinases. Stabilization of the kinase in either its active 
or inactive conformation with diverse small molecules decreased HSP90 
association. Our results establish HSP90 client recognition as a combinatorial 
process: CDC37 provides recognition of the kinase family, whereas thermodynamic 
parameters determine client binding within the family.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.047
PMCID: PMC3894786
PMID: 22939624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

HSP90 is one of the most abundant chaperone proteins in the cell. It interacts with a large and diverse group of substrate proteins, commonly referred to as “clients,” promoting their folding and function. HSP90 seems to be focused on metastable proteins that are regulatory hubs in biological networks. This makes HSP90 a driving force in the evolution of new forms and functions in organisms as diverse as yeast, fruit flies, and thale cress. Recent work has established the importance of HSP90 in many aspects of human biology, ranging from cancer to infectious diseases to neurodegeneration ( Taipale et al., 2010 ). Identifying the full spectrum of HSP90 client proteins has, therefore, gained increased urgency. So, too, has the need to determine the mechanistic basis of HSP90 client protein interactions.

In contrast to Hsp70 and Hsp60 chaperones, for which the mechanism of client protein recognition is understood in general terms, we still have only a rudimentary understanding of what determines client protein binding by HSP90. Three features of HSP90 client interactions illustrate the complexity of the problem: the perplexing diversity of Hsp90 clients, the metastable character of their folds, and the complexity of its chaperone cycle. First, HSP90 clients encompass a wide range of proteins with unrelated amino acid sequences and functions, including protein kinases and steroid hormone receptors ( Taipale et al., 2010 ). Although the kinase domain and the ligand-binding domain of steroid hormone receptors are structurally unrelated, these domains must have specific sequence or structural features that HSP90 recognizes. Second, in each client protein family some members robustly interact with the chaperone, while others apparently do not associate with it at all. For example, mature epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) does not associate with HSP90, whereas its closest homolog, ERBB2, tightly interacts with it ( Xu et al., 2005 ). Thus, despite the overall conservation of the protein fold, there must be specific sequence or structural features that distinguish client proteins from nonclients. Finally, HSP90 associates with a large cohort of auxiliary proteins, known as cochaperones, which regulate its function and seem to provide specificity to client protein interactions. Yet, the role and specificity of cochaperones in client protein recognition is not well understood.

Previous work on steroid hormone receptors and kinases has suggested some features that could determine HSP90 client protein associations ( Ricketson et al., 2007 ; Xu et al., 2005 ). For some kinases, mutations in the loop between αC helix and b4 strand in the N-lobe of the kinase domain have strong effects on HSP90 binding, leading to the hypothesis that the aC-b4 loop is the HSP90 recognition site ( Citri et al., 2006 ; Xu et al., 2005 ). Yet, a survey of known HSP90 client kinases and nonclients did not uncover client-specific sequence motifs in the loop ( Citri et al., 2006 ). It is often speculated that oncogenic kinases (and other clients) associate with HSP90 because the chaperone recognizes something related to their conformational instability, but the data are insufficient to reach any unifying conclusions and reconcile diverse observations ( Caplan et al., 2007 ; Taipale et al., 2010 ).

A quantitative high-throughput assessment of HSP90 client interactions could transform our understanding of these issues but has proved challenging for several reasons. First, HSP90’s interactions with its clients are transient and might not be detected by standard interaction assays that require the formation of stable complexes. Second, binary assays, such as yeast two-hybrid assays, may not recapitulate all HSP90 interactions in human cells due to the absence of correct cochaperones or posttranslational modifications. Third, client proteins tend to be expressed at very low levels. Consequently, methods based on mass spectrometry have primarily revealed chaperone:: cochaperone interactions; only a handful of bona fide client proteins have been found by this method ( Falsone et al., 2005 , 2007 ). Finally, most assays do not allow relative quantification of interactions with HSP90.

To circumvent these limitations, we adapted and further developed the LUMIER assay ( Barrios-Rodiles et al., 2005 ) to systematically measure HSP90 interaction with the majority of human protein kinases, transcription factors and ubiquitin ligases in vivo. Surprisingly, HSP90 bound only ~7% of transcription factors, but 30% of ubiquitin ligases and 60% of kinases. The conserved nature of the kinase fold, together with the sheer numbers of clients, then provided a robust platform to address client protein features that determine interaction with HSP90. In addition to providing a comprehensive view of the HSP90::kinase interactome, our results reveal two principles of HSP90 client interactions. A cochaperone provides recognition of particular types of fold, whereas thermal and conformational stability determines the extent of interaction.

DISCUSSION

High-throughput quantitative analysis of genetic interactions in vivo, pioneered in the budding yeast, has greatly increased our understanding of cellular circuitries ( Costanzo et al., 2010 ). LUMIER with BACON provides a method for revealing the physical interaction networks in a quantitative manner on a comparable scale. We utilized the assay to quantitatively characterize the in vivo interactions of HSP90 and CDC37 with the majority of wild-type human kinases, transcription factors, and E3 ligases. HSP90 is known to play a key role in regulating cellular circuitry and, together, the assayed proteins form the core of that circuitry. The analysis uncovered interactions between HSP90 and almost 400 client proteins, more than all previous studies combined, considerably expanding our picture of this essential chaperone’s function in human cells.

More importantly, this quantitative and systematic approach allowed us to place HSP90 interactions into a broader context and uncover global principles that could not be established with studies of individual clients, nor with previous high-throughput approaches. First, the CDC37 cochaperone serves as an adaptor and provides specificity for protein kinases at the family level. Our assay should allow the identification of adaptors for other types of fold, such as leucine-rich repeat proteins ( Kadota et al., 2010 ) and the β-propeller WD40 and Kelch domains (reported here).

Second, within the kinase family, Hsp90 clients are ultimately distinguished from nonclients on the basis of their intrinsic stability. Agents that stabilize a client kinase in either its active or inactive conformation reduce HSP90 association, demonstrating that HSP90 does not bind the kinase in either of its folded states. We suggest that client kinases are unstable in their fully folded forms, with a higher tendency to adopt a conformation that HSP90 and CDC37 can recognize. Associations with HSP90, then, would be determined by the equilibrium between the fully folded and chaperone-susceptible conformations of each client. This conformational model can explain why kinase::HSP90 interactions fall into a continuum spanning over a 100-fold range, in contrast to the binary model of clients and nonclients. In keeping with this interpretation of our high-throughput analysis, in an electron microscopic analysis of a particular client complex, HSP90/CDC37/CDK4, both lobes of the CDK4 kinase are visible, clearly indicating that this client is not in its tightly packed closed conformation ( Vaughan et al., 2006 ). As HSP90 client kinases undergo repeated rounds of binding and release, inhibition of HSP90’s ATPase activity prevents reloading of clients onto the chaperone ( Krukenberg et al., 2011 ). This redirects the clients to one of two alternative fates: degradation or aggregation ( Figure 7 ).

The client protein dissociation rates we observed in vivo (T 1/2 = 2–6 min) upon HSP90 inhibition were surprisingly close to the ATP hydrolysis rate of HSP90 in vitro ( Richter et al., 2008 ). Moreover, although the strength of Hsp90’s associations with strong versus weak clients varied over a 100-fold range, most clients dissociated from HSP90 with very similar kinetics. These observations imply that the dominant determinants of HSP90 association are client-binding on-rates.

How can our model be reconciled with the existing αC-β4 recognition loop model ( Citri et al., 2006 ; Xu et al., 2005 )? The αC-β4 loop is located immediately adjacent to the kinase hinge region that in many kinases is involved in maintaining the inactive conformation ( Chen et al., 2007 ). In fact, the backbone atoms of the αC-β4 loop in several kinases form hydrogen bonds with critical residues in the hinge. Loss of these hydrogen bonds leads to ligand-independent kinase activation ( Chen et al., 2007 ). This network of stabilizing hydrogen bonds is conserved in several tyrosine kinases, and mutations in the αC-β4 loop in ERBB2 lead to activation of the kinase ( Fan et al., 2008 ). Thus, it is likely that mutations introduced in the loop increase the flexibility of the hinge and lead to increased HSP90 interaction due to structural destabilization, not through the introduction of a new binding motif.

Our model accounts for a number of previous findings. First, some kinases, such as c-Src and EGFR, associate transiently with HSP90 during maturation, but the fully folded proteins do not bind HSP90 ( Xu et al., 1999 , 2005 ). Second, some mutations can decrease a kinase’s steady state association with HSP90 without having an effect on the transient association during maturation. It has been suggested that the motif HSP90 recognizes during posttranslational folding of kinases is distinct from that recognized in mature proteins ( Xu et al., 2005 ). A more parsimonious explanation is that HSP90 binds on-pathway conformations. Kinases such as c-Src and EGFR access this conformation during initial folding, but they are stable after reaching their mature states. But strong client kinases repeatedly access the Hsp90-susceptible conformation after their initial folding.
