---
pmid: '23139419'
title: Identification of STAT2 serine 287 as a novel regulatory phosphorylation site
  in type I interferon-induced cellular responses.
authors:
- Steen HC
- Nogusa S
- Thapa RJ
- Basagoudanavar SH
- Gill AL
- Merali S
- Barrero CA
- Balachandran S
- Gamero AM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3537073
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.402529
---

# Identification of STAT2 serine 287 as a novel regulatory phosphorylation site in type I interferon-induced cellular responses.
**Authors:** Steen HC, Nogusa S, Thapa RJ, Basagoudanavar SH, Gill AL, Merali S, Barrero CA, Balachandran S, Gamero AM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M112.402529](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M112.402529)
**PMC:** [PMC3537073](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3537073/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jan 4;288(1):747-58. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.402529. Epub 2012
 Nov 8.

Identification of STAT2 serine 287 as a novel regulatory phosphorylation site in 
type I interferon-induced cellular responses.

Steen HC(1), Nogusa S, Thapa RJ, Basagoudanavar SH, Gill AL, Merali S, Barrero 
CA, Balachandran S, Gamero AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Temple University School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

STAT2 is a positive modulator of the transcriptional response to type I 
interferons (IFNs). STAT2 acquires transcriptional function by becoming tyrosine 
phosphorylated and imported to the nucleus following type I IFN receptor 
activation. Although most STAT proteins become dually phosphorylated on specific 
tyrosine and serine residues to acquire full transcriptional activity, no serine 
phosphorylation site in STAT2 has been reported. To find novel phosphorylation 
sites, mass spectrometry of immunoprecipitated STAT2 was used to identify 
several phosphorylated residues. Of these, substitution of serine 287 with 
alanine (S287A) generated a gain-of-function mutant that enhanced the biological 
effects of IFN-α. S287A-STAT2 increased cell growth inhibition, prolonged 
protection against vesicular stomatitis virus infection and enhanced 
transcriptional responses following exposure of cells to IFN-α. In contrast, a 
phosphomimetic STAT2 mutant (S287D) produced a loss-of-function protein that 
weakly activated IFN-induced ISGs. Our mechanistic studies suggest that 
S287A-STAT2 likely mediates its gain-of-function effects by prolonging 
STAT2/STAT1 dimer activation and retaining it in transcriptionally active 
complexes with chromatin. Altogether, we have uncovered that in response to type 
I IFN, STAT2 is serine phosphorylated in the coiled-coil domain that when 
phosphorylated can negatively regulate the biological activities of type I IFNs.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.402529
PMCID: PMC3537073
PMID: 23139419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

STAT2 is a positive modulator of the transcriptional response to type I interferons (IFNs). STAT2 acquires transcriptional function by becoming tyrosine phosphorylated and imported to the nucleus following type I IFN receptor activation. Although most STAT proteins become dually phosphorylated on specific tyrosine and serine residues to acquire full transcriptional activity, no serine phosphorylation site in STAT2 has been reported. To find novel phosphorylation sites, mass spectrometry of immunoprecipitated STAT2 was used to identify several phosphorylated residues. Of these, substitution of serine 287 with alanine (S287A) generated a gain-of-function mutant that enhanced the biological effects of IFN-α. S287A-STAT2 increased cell growth inhibition, prolonged protection against vesicular stomatitis virus infection and enhanced transcriptional responses following exposure of cells to IFN-α. In contrast, a phosphomimetic STAT2 mutant (S287D) produced a loss-of-function protein that weakly activated IFN-induced ISGs. Our mechanistic studies suggest that S287A-STAT2 likely mediates its gain-of-function effects by prolonging STAT2/STAT1 dimer activation and retaining it in transcriptionally active complexes with chromatin. Altogether, we have uncovered that in response to type I IFN, STAT2 is serine phosphorylated in the coiled-coil domain that when phosphorylated can negatively regulate the biological activities of type I IFNs.

Introduction

Type I interferons (IFN-α/β) are pleiotropic cytokines that induce the expression of multiple genes with antiviral, antiproliferative and immunomodulatory activities ( 1 ). It is widely recognized that the transcriptional responses to type I IFNs are triggered by activation of the canonical JAK/STAT pathway. Binding of type I IFNs to the IFNAR1-IFNAR2 heterodimeric receptor complex activates the receptor-associated tyrosine kinases JAK1 and TYK2, which, in turn, transphosphorylate the intracellular domains of IFNAR1 and IFNAR2, thus creating binding sites for the transcription factors STAT1 and STAT2 ( 2 ). JAK1 and TYK2 phosphorylate STAT1 at tyrosine (Tyr)-701 and STAT2 at Tyr-690 in human cells ( 3 – 5 ). The ternary IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) 2 transcriptional complex is then formed consisting of STAT1 and STAT2 bound as heterodimers via reciprocal phosphotyrosyl-SH2 interactions together with the IFN regulatory factor-9 (IRF9). As a result, ISGF3 translocates to the nucleus and binds to the interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE) of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) and initiates gene transcription ( 6 , 7 ).

A common feature shared by all members of the STAT family is a requirement of ligand-induced phosphorylation of a conserved tyrosine residue, located N-terminal of the transactivation domain, for their activation ( 3 , 5 , 8 – 12 ). A second phosphorylation event occurs on a serine residue 20 amino acids or more C-terminal of the activating tyrosine site, mapped to the transactivation domain. Phosphorylation of this residue influences the transcriptional activity of STAT proteins ( 13 – 17 ). In the case of STAT1, phosphorylation of Tyr-701 and translocation to the nucleus are both required for its stable association with chromatin and the ensuing phosphorylation of Ser-727 ( 18 ). Unlike the other members of the STAT family, no such serine phosphorylation event has been reported in STAT2.

Tyrosine phosphorylation is not the only known IFN-inducible post-transcriptional modification in STAT2. In addition to STAT1 and IRF9, IFN-α induces the acetylation of STAT2 at lysine 390 by cAMP responsive element-binding protein ( 19 ). Acetylated Lys-390 alters the interaction between STAT2 and STAT1, thereby facilitating IFN-induced activation and antiviral activity. The transcriptional activity of STAT2 can also be modulated by a stretch of amino acid residues mapped to the SH2 domain of STAT2. Our laboratory identified a novel motif consisting of proline 630, tyrosine 631, threonine 632, and lysine 633 that we termed PYTK and is conserved in STAT1 and STAT3 ( 20 , 21 ). A point mutation of Pro-630 to leucine surfaced under IFN-α selection pressure and was found to abrogate IFN-α induced apoptosis, whereas mutation of Y631 to phenylalanine had the opposite effect as it promoted the apoptotic effects of IFN-α. These observations indicate that the function of STAT2 is dictated by specific residues, with some being targeted for post-translational modifications.

Our study identifies for the first time that STAT2 is serine phosphorylated in an IFN-dependent manner at Ser-287, a residue mapped to the coiled-coil domain of STAT2. This novel post-translational event is important for regulating STAT2/ISGF3 signaling. Mutating Ser-287 to alanine (S287A) generated a gain-of-function STAT2 mutant that augmented the anti-proliferative and antiviral response to IFN-α, whereas a phosphomimetic mutation of Ser-287 dramatically impaired the transcriptional activity of STAT2. Our findings support the existence of a novel regulatory serine residue in STAT2 that when phosphorylated affects type I IFN signaling.

DISCUSSION

Our objective was to identify novel phosphorylation sites in STAT2. All other STATs have been confirmed to be tyrosine and serine phosphorylated to acquire transcriptional activity and become fully active ( 13 – 15 , 31 ), with the exception of STAT6, in which serine phosphorylation inactivates its transcriptional function ( 16 , 17 ). Although the transcriptional activity of STAT2 is driven by tyrosine phosphorylation and nuclear translocation, it is less clear whether the transcriptional response to type I IFNs also requires STAT2 to be serine phosphorylated. We used mass spectrometry and identified Ser-287 as a bona fide phosphorylation site. This amino acid residue is mapped to the CCD of STAT2 that when mutated to alanine (S287A) generated a gain-of-function mutant that increased the biological effects of type I IFNs over that of WT-STAT2. In contrast, substitution of Ser-287 with aspartic acid (S287D), to mimic serine phosphorylation, had the expected opposite behavior of S287A-STAT2. The dramatic negative effect S287D-STAT2 had on IFN-α signaling indicates that the role of phosphorylated Ser-287 is to limit type I IFN signaling.

Recently, the analogous site to Ser-287 in STAT1, threonine 288, was found to be mutated to alanine in several patients with chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis ( 32 , 33 ). The T288A substitution was one of 12 mutations clustered spatially around the same region in the CCD. The resulting phenotype for 11 of the 12 mutations, including T288A, was resistance to phospho-Tyr-701 dephosphorylation after activation with IFN-γ, IFN-α or IL-27, which led to increased GAS binding (EMSA) and GAS-dependent but not ISRE-dependent ISG induction. This observation parallels to what we have observed with S287A in STAT2. Although the exact mechanism of STAT2 inactivation is not clear, the most feasible model of STAT1 inactivation has been proposed by the group of James Darnell. As phosphorylated STAT1 homodimers disassociate from DNA, the STAT1 dimer now interacts via their N-terminal domains ( 28 , 34 ). This facilitates reorientation of the STAT1 dimer from a parallel (active) to an anti-parallel (inactive) conformation ( 35 , 36 ). Instead of phospho-tyrosyl-SH2 interactions, the new anti-parallel dimer is stabilized by reciprocal interaction between the CCD of one monomer and the DBD of the other monomer. The final step of this reorientation process is the dephosphorylation of the now exposed phospho-tyrosines. The critical residues for the STAT1 CCD-DBD interactions have been mapped to Phe-172 in the CCD and Gln-340, Gly-384, and Gln-408 of the DBD. Mutation of any of these amino acids leads to prolonged STAT1-phosphorylation due to impaired dephosphorylation, similarly to what was seen in Liu et al. ( 32 ). It is, therefore, plausible that the mutations identified in chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis patients, all localized near the CCD-DBD interaction surface, disrupt the formation of the anti-parallel STAT1 dimer necessary for proper dephosphorylation of phospho-Tyr-701-STAT1. Curiously, only Phe-172 is conserved in STAT2, whereas the other three critical residues conserved in the STAT1 DBD are not, indicating that the exact mechanism of STAT2/STAT1 anti-parallel binding might be different from that of STAT1 homodimers. Therefore, until the structure of STAT2-containing complexes is solved, mutational studies are warranted to identify regulatory residues that are critical in the regulation of STAT2 function.

Protein modeling of STAT2 using the crystal structure of STAT1 as a protein template infers that Ser-287 is exposed and available for post-translational modifications and/or direct protein interaction with a second protein. Furthermore, according to the solved structures of other STATs ( 28 , 37 ), this site is located on the side of the CCD that is facing away from the DBD and SH2 domain as the STAT-dimer is associated with DNA. Therefore, it makes it less likely that the S287A mutation directly affects STAT functions that are linked to DNA binding and/or SH2-mediated STAT dimerization.

Type I IFNs activate the transcriptional activity of STAT2. Our qRT-PCR results showed that S287A-STAT2 augmented the expression of several IFN target genes; which correlated with sustained activation of STAT1 and STAT2. Our qChIP experiments confirmed increased binding of S287A-STAT2 to chromatin at later time points compared with WT-STAT2. This helps explain why ISG expression was more pronounced at later times in the presence of S287A-STAT2 as detected in our initial qRT-PCR experiment. Although we did not detect significant alterations in the level of acetylated histone H3 at the ISRE region in the ISG promoters when cells express either WT-STAT2 or S287A-STAT2, it is most probable that acetylation and/or methylation of specific lysine residues in histone H3 may take place with S287A-STAT2 ( 38 ). Alternatively, binding of acetylated histone H3 to other regions distal from the promoter site may be preferred in the presence of S287A-STAT2 following IFN-α stimulation ( 39 ). It is also possible that S287A-STAT2 may slowly increase the binding affinity for adaptor molecules/coactivators as it has been reported to occur with the INHAT component, pp32 ( 40 ). pp32 interacts with tyrosine phosphorylated STAT2 and STAT1 and potentiates the expression of ISGs. Furthermore, IFN-α-induced acetylation of STAT2 Lys-390 is presumed to facilitate the reorientation of the antiparallel STAT1/STAT2 heterodimer to the parallel conformation and promote the antiviral effects of type I IFNs ( 19 ). This leads to speculation that perhaps S287A-STAT2 augments and/or extends the duration of acetylated STAT2 during which STAT2/STAT1 heterodimers are kept in the active parallel orientation leading to enhanced gene transcription. Alternatively, the S287A mutation may turn STAT2 into a more flexible molecule in which reorientation of antiparallel STAT1/STAT2 heterodimers to the parallel conformation in IFN naïve and/or IFN desensitized cells is more efficient and stable, resulting in prolonged STAT activation. Overall, our study reports the first observation that STAT2 is serine-phosphorylated in response to type I IFNs. Unlike serine phosphorylation of other STATs, Ser-287-STAT2 phosphorylation evokes a negative regulatory role in the antiproliferative and antiviral effects of type I IFNs. This information could serve as the platform in the development of therapeutics to disable resistance and improve the clinical efficacy of type I IFNs by targeting the responsible kinase.
