---
pmid: '18809582'
title: Nucleophosmin serves as a rate-limiting nuclear export chaperone for the Mammalian
  ribosome.
authors:
- Maggi LB Jr
- Kuchenruether M
- Dadey DY
- Schwope RM
- Grisendi S
- Townsend RR
- Pandolfi PP
- Weber JD
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC2593371
doi: 10.1128/MCB.01548-07
---

# Nucleophosmin serves as a rate-limiting nuclear export chaperone for the Mammalian ribosome.
**Authors:** Maggi LB Jr, Kuchenruether M, Dadey DY, Schwope RM, Grisendi S, Townsend RR, Pandolfi PP, Weber JD
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.01548-07](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.01548-07)
**PMC:** [PMC2593371](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2593371/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Dec;28(23):7050-65. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01548-07. Epub 2008
Sep  22.

Nucleophosmin serves as a rate-limiting nuclear export chaperone for the 
Mammalian ribosome.

Maggi LB Jr(1), Kuchenruether M, Dadey DY, Schwope RM, Grisendi S, Townsend RR, 
Pandolfi PP, Weber JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Molecular Oncology, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Nucleophosmin (NPM) (B23) is an essential protein in mouse development and cell 
growth; however, it has been assigned numerous roles in very diverse cellular 
processes. Here, we present a unified mechanism for NPM's role in cell growth; 
NPM directs the nuclear export of both 40S and 60S ribosomal subunits. NPM 
interacts with rRNA and large and small ribosomal subunit proteins and also 
colocalizes with large and small ribosomal subunit proteins in the nucleolus, 
nucleus, and cytoplasm. The transduction of NPM shuttling-defective mutants or 
the loss of Npm1 inhibited the nuclear export of both the 40S and 60S ribosomal 
subunits, reduced the available pool of cytoplasmic polysomes, and diminished 
overall protein synthesis without affecting rRNA processing or ribosome 
assembly. While the inhibition of NPM shuttling can block cellular 
proliferation, the dramatic effects on ribosome export occur prior to cell cycle 
inhibition. Modest increases in NPM expression amplified the export of newly 
synthesized rRNAs, resulting in increased rates of protein synthesis and 
indicating that NPM is rate limiting in this pathway. These results support the 
idea that NPM-regulated ribosome export is a fundamental process in cell growth.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.01548-07
PMCID: PMC2593371
PMID: 18809582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Nucleophosmin (NPM) (B23) is an essential protein in mouse development and cell growth; however, it has been assigned numerous roles in very diverse cellular processes. Here, we present a unified mechanism for NPM's role in cell growth; NPM directs the nuclear export of both 40S and 60S ribosomal subunits. NPM interacts with rRNA and large and small ribosomal subunit proteins and also colocalizes with large and small ribosomal subunit proteins in the nucleolus, nucleus, and cytoplasm. The transduction of NPM shuttling-defective mutants or the loss of Npm1 inhibited the nuclear export of both the 40S and 60S ribosomal subunits, reduced the available pool of cytoplasmic polysomes, and diminished overall protein synthesis without affecting rRNA processing or ribosome assembly. While the inhibition of NPM shuttling can block cellular proliferation, the dramatic effects on ribosome export occur prior to cell cycle inhibition. Modest increases in NPM expression amplified the export of newly synthesized rRNAs, resulting in increased rates of protein synthesis and indicating that NPM is rate limiting in this pathway. These results support the idea that NPM-regulated ribosome export is a fundamental process in cell growth.

DISCUSSION

The nucleolus is a dynamic subnuclear organelle tasked with producing the core of the protein translation machinery of a cell, the ribosome ( 30 , 49 ). Historic models of nucleolar function have depicted ribosome biogenesis as more of a passive, reactionary process in the cell, where growth signals are relayed to the nucleolus to increase rRNA synthesis, resulting in higher rates of ribosome production to meet the demands of increased proliferation rates. However, a more current view of the nucleolus as a sensor of both stress and growth has emerged. In challenge of this “static ribosome factory” model, numerous proteins originally thought to reside solely in the nucleolus have recently been shown to continuously shuttle from the nucleolus to various subcellular compartments in a regulated manner, providing evidence that the nucleolus is a dynamic site of numerous cellular events ( 2 , 4 , 21 , 22 , 51 , 52 ). One of these nucleolar proteins, NPM, has been suggested to be involved in a variety of important cellular processes in and out of the nucleolus, including ribosome processing, molecular chaperoning, centrosome duplication, and transcriptional regulation in order to regulate cell growth and proliferation ( 5 , 10 , 23 , 31 - 33 ).

One of the challenges surrounding NPM is its apparent ability to perform functions that are in stark contrast to one another. Specifically, NPM has been reported to interact with all three components of the ARF-p53-Mdm2 pathway to both activate and suppress this cascade ( 3 , 4 , 7 , 19 , 24 - 26 , 45 ). However, the overarching theme of this pathway is the regulation of growth and proliferation. Taken as single observations, numerous conflicting views of NPM function can be readily made. However, when placed together with our current findings, a more unified outlook on NPM function emerges, as we will discuss below. Our current study offers data that integrate many of these seemingly disconnected functions of NPM. We show that NPM interacts with components of the ribosome, acting as a chaperone to direct the nuclear export of ribosomes. The loss of functional NPM (either through a loss of expression or shuttling-defective mutants) results in a complete loss of ribosome nuclear export and subsequent attenuation in cell growth. Moreover, the transcription of the rDNA locus is severely reduced in the absence of NPM, most likely through an indirect mechanism controlled by ARF and p53. Thus, it is possible that NPM's apparent indirect control of numerous cellular functions stems from its ability to regulate ribosome production and nuclear export using the ARF and p53 tumor suppressors to serve as feedback sensors set to prevent these cell growth processes (e.g., rDNA synthesis, rRNA processing, and centrosome duplication) in the absence of NPM. This is consistent with the notion that the loss of Npm1 is tumorigenic ( 15 ). We predict that the loss of Npm1 , which induces a p53 response ( 15 ), places genetic pressure on the ARF/p53 axis through the cell's ultimate need to produce functional cytosolic ribosomes, eventually selecting for the loss of ARF/p53 pathway components and leading to cellular transformation. In agreement with this notion, the concomitant loss of p53 rescues the growth defects observed in Npm1 −/− MEFs ( 15 ).

The mechanism of NPM's growth-promoting properties is thought to be mandated through alterations in rRNA processing ( 41 ). We have provided evidence that overexpressed NPM does not alter rRNA processing or ribosome assembly, nor is Npm1 obligatory for rRNA processing or ribosome assembly to occur normally. We now show that NPM serves as a nuclear export chaperone for the ribosome, drawing similarities to previous studies that showed an in vitro propensity for NPM to serve as a protein chaperone ( 32 , 45 ). Even modest increases in NPM protein expression amplified ribosome export, resulting in increased rates of protein synthesis, demonstrating that NPM is rate limiting in its capacity to shuttle ribosomes to the cytosol. Under this model, NPM would serve as an adaptor, analogous to NMD3, bridging the ribosome with CRM1 prior to export through the nuclear pore ( 47 ). In fact, we were able to copurify the nuclear pore proteins Nup50 and Nup62 with NPM, demonstrating that these export complexes exist in vivo.

The similarities between NPM and NMD3 are intriguing, but there are enough measurable differences to suggest that they do not perform identical functions and rather, most likely, complement one another in their abilities to act as nuclear export chaperones. Unlike NMD3, we found NPM in complexes with ribosomal proteins and rRNAs from both the small and large ribosome subunits. Additionally, the mutation of the NMD3 nuclear export signal resulted in only an attenuation of 28S rRNA export ( 47 ), whereas NPMdL readily inhibits the nuclear export of all newly synthesized 28S, 18S, and 5S rRNAs, suggesting that NPM may reside upstream of NMD3 in regulating the nuclear export of all ribosomal subunits. Moreover, the overexpression of NPM is capable of dramatically increasing ribosome nuclear export. The striking sequestration of the entire ribosome in the nucleus by mutant NPM molecules is underscored further by the rapid depletion of newly assembled polysomes in cells unable to shuttle NPM protein complexes. Thus, we propose that NPM serves as a “growth thermostat” in the nucleolus, ready to respond to changes in the cell that might require more or less ribosome output for protein synthesis. The loss of Npm1 confirms this hypothesis, with Npm hy/hy and Npm −/− cells displaying a severe attenuation of all rRNA export. Moreover, cells displaying hyperactivated mTOR signaling exhibit elevated NPM protein levels and produce dramatic increases in levels of rRNA export and polysome formation, all of which require functional NPM ( 36 ).

Given NPM's role in the nucleolar growth-promoting pathway, through ribosome export regulation, it is not surprising that several groups including our own have shown NPM to be a p53-independent target of the nucleolar ARF tumor suppressor ( 3 , 4 , 19 ). In order to maintain proper nucleolar function, ARF should be sensitive to abrupt changes in ribosome output, constantly monitoring the rate of ribosome synthesis and export by NPM. ARF is often referred to as a sensor of hyperproliferative signals, such as those emanating from Myc and Ras ( 16 , 34 , 54 ), but both of these oncoproteins are quite capable of eliciting hypergrowth signals as well. Indeed, recent evidence has demonstrated that oncogenic myc translocates to the nucleolus in order to greatly increase rDNA synthesis ( 1 , 12 ), and under some settings, ARF can act to antagonize nucleolar myc oncoproteins ( 13 , 38 ). In order to maintain nucleolar integrity in the face of myc-induced increases in rRNAs, the cell might also require NPM to enhance the rate of ribosome nuclear export. In support of this notion, Npm1 is a direct transcriptional target of myc ( 17 , 29 , 50 , 53 ). Accordingly, nucleolar ARF may have evolved to monitor this process and, as such, is also a target of myc induction ( 54 ). In cancers, it then becomes advantageous to disrupt the normal regulation of this pathway. Under normal conditions, NPM is devoted to ribosome nuclear export to maintain protein synthesis at a constant rate. We predict that the interruption of this nucleolar homeostasis occurs through two different signals. First, stress signals that alter nucleolar structures ( 39 ) and delocalize NPM to the nucleoplasm, where it binds to p53 or Mdm2 ( 7 , 25 ), would serve to not only activate the p53 pathway but also divert NPM from its normal role in rRNA export. Dramatic decreases in protein synthesis rates are hallmarks of these cellular stress outcomes ( 37 ). Second, oncogenic growth signals that upregulate NPM protein expression ( 36 ) might also trigger the ARF checkpoint, with accumulated nucleolar ARF proteins preventing the nuclear export of NPM-ribosome complexes ( 4 , 51 ). However, in the absence of functional ARF (such as in HeLa or TKO cells), NPM function would be unopposed. Thus, endogenous NPM proteins are capable of amplifying the rate of rRNA export, resulting in dramatic increases in polysome formation and protein translation, a hallmark of tumorigenesis.
