---
pmid: '15131783'
title: 'Inducible Cre-mediated control of gene expression in the murine gastrointestinal
  tract: effect of loss of beta-catenin.'
authors:
- Ireland H
- Kemp R
- Houghton C
- Howard L
- Clarke AR
- Sansom OJ
- Winton DJ
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2004.03.020
---

# Inducible Cre-mediated control of gene expression in the murine gastrointestinal tract: effect of loss of beta-catenin.
**Authors:** Ireland H, Kemp R, Houghton C, Howard L, Clarke AR, Sansom OJ, Winton DJ
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2004.03.020](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2004.03.020)

## Abstract

1. Gastroenterology. 2004 May;126(5):1236-46. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2004.03.020.

Inducible Cre-mediated control of gene expression in the murine gastrointestinal 
tract: effect of loss of beta-catenin.

Ireland H(1), Kemp R, Houghton C, Howard L, Clarke AR, Sansom OJ, Winton DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Cancer Research UK, Cambridge Institute of Medical 
Research, Wellcome Trust/MRC Building, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, 
Cambridge CB2 2XY, UK.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: A system for introducing specific gene mutations into the 
epithelia of the adult murine gastrointestinal tract by the transcriptional 
regulation of Cre recombinase is presented and applied to delete beta-catenin, a 
central mediator of Wnt signaling, within the small intestine (SI).
METHODS: In a transgenic line (Ahcre), cre expression is inducible from a 
cytochrome P450 promoter element that is transcriptionally up-regulated in 
response to lipophilic xenobiotics such as beta-napthoflavone.
RESULTS: Recombination at a lacZ reporter locus showed extensive expression of 
beta-galactosidase in liver, intestine, pancreas, gallbladder, esophagus, and 
stomach in response to beta-napthoflavone treatment. Expression patterns were 
stable in renewing epithelia for at least 6 months, implying that long-lived 
stem cells undergo recombination. Analysis of the intestinal epithelium showed 
dose responsiveness in the extent of recombination and that villus and crypt 
populations could be targeted differentially by varying the route of 
administration of beta-napthoflavone. The use of this system to delete 
beta-catenin in the SI caused crypt ablation, increased apoptosis, depleted 
numbers of goblet cells, and detachment of villus absorptive cells from the 
villus core as intact sheets.
CONCLUSIONS: The Ahcre model provides a simple route for introducing specific 
gene mutations into many of the epithelia of the gastrointestinal tract of the 
mouse. It has been used here to show that beta-catenin is required for the 
maintenance of intestinal cell proliferation and is implicated in goblet cell 
differentiation and enterocyte-matrix attachment.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2004.03.020
PMID: 15131783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
