---
pmid: '25712891'
title: G551D-CFTR needs more bound actin than wild-type CFTR to maintain its presence
  in plasma membranes.
authors:
- Trouvé P
- Kerbiriou M
- Teng L
- Benz N
- Taiya M
- Le Hir S
- Férec C
journal: Cell Biol Int
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC11108291
doi: 10.1002/cbin.10456
---

# G551D-CFTR needs more bound actin than wild-type CFTR to maintain its presence in plasma membranes.
**Authors:** Trouvé P, Kerbiriou M, Teng L, Benz N, Taiya M, Le Hir S, Férec C
**Journal:** Cell Biol Int (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cbin.10456](https://doi.org/10.1002/cbin.10456)
**PMC:** [PMC11108291](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11108291/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Biol Int. 2015 Aug;39(8):978-85. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10456. Epub 2015 Apr
8.

G551D-CFTR needs more bound actin than wild-type CFTR to maintain its presence 
in plasma membranes.

Trouvé P(1)(2), Kerbiriou M(1)(2), Teng L(1)(2), Benz N(1)(3), Taiya M(4), Le 
Hir S(1)(5), Férec C(1)(2)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Inserm, UMR1078, Brest, F-29218, France.
(2)Université de Bretagne Occidentale, Faculté de Médecine et des sciences de la 
santé, Brest, F-29200, France.
(3)Association de Biogénétique Gaëtan Salaün - Bretagne, Brest, F-29200, France.
(4)Service commun de spectrométrie de masse, Université de Bretagne Occidentale, 
Brest, F-29200, France.
(5)C.H.U. Brest, Hôpital Morvan, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Brest, 
F-29200, France.
(6)Etablissement Français du Sang - Bretagne, Brest, F-29200, France.

Cystic Fibrosis is due to mutations in the CFTR gene. The missense mutation 
G551D (approx. 5% of cases) encodes a CFTR chloride channel with normal cell 
surface expression but with an altered chloride channel activity, leading to a 
severe phenotype. Our aim was to identify specific interacting proteins of 
G551D-CFTR which could explain the channel defect. Wild-type CFTR (Wt-CFTR) was 
co-immunoprecipitated from stably transfected HeLa cells and resolved by 2D gel 
electrophoresis. Among the detected spots, one was expressed at a high level. 
Mass Spectrometry revealed that it corresponded to actin which is known to be 
involved in the CFTR's channel function. To assess whether actin could be 
involved in the altered G551D-CFTR function, its basal expression was studied. 
Because actin expression was the same in wt- and in G551D-CFTR expressing cells, 
its interaction with both wt- and G551D-CFTR was studied by 
co-immunoprecipitation, and we found that a higher amount of actin was bound 
onto G551D-CFTR than onto Wt-CFTR. The role of actin upon wt- and G551D-CFTR 
function was further studied by patch-clamp experiments after cytochalasin D 
treatment of the cells. We found a decrease of the very weak currents in 
G551D-CFTR expressing cells. Because a higher amount of actin is bound onto 
G551D-CFTR than onto Wt-CFTR, it is likely to be not involved in the mutated 
CFTR's defect. Nevertheless, because actin is necessary to maintain the very 
weak global currents observed in G551D-CFTR expressing HeLa cells, we conclude 
that more actin is necessary to maintain G551D-CFTR in the plasma membrane than 
for Wt-CFTR.

© 2015 International Federation for Cell Biology.

DOI: 10.1002/cbin.10456
PMID: 25712891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Cystic fibrosis (CF), one of the most common fatal hereditary disorders, is caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator ( CFTR ) gene. The CFTR gene product is a multidomain adenosine triphosphate-binding cassette (ABC) protein that functions as a chloride (Cl − ) channel that is regulated by intracellular magnesium [Mg 2+ ] i . The most common mutations in CFTR are a deletion of a phenylalanine residue at position 508 (ΔF508-CFTR, 70–80 % of CF phenotypes) and a Gly551Asp substitution (G551D-CFTR, 4–5 % of alleles), which lead to decreased or almost abolished Cl − channel function, respectively. Magnesium ions have to be finely regulated within cells for optimal expression and function of CFTR. Therefore, the melastatin-like transient receptor potential cation channel, subfamily M, member 7 (TRPM7), which is responsible for Mg 2+ entry, was studies and [Mg 2+ ] i measured in cells stably expressing wildtype CFTR, and two mutant proteins (ΔF508-CFTR and G551D-CFTR). This study shows for the first time that [Mg 2+ ] i is decreased in cells expressing ΔF508-CFTR and G551D-CFTR mutated proteins. It was also observed that the expression of the TRPM7 protein is increased; however, membrane localization was altered for both ΔF508del-CFTR and G551D-CFTR. Furthermore, both the function and regulation of the TRPM7 channel regarding Mg 2+ is decreased in the cells expressing the mutated CFTR. Ca 2+ influx via TRPM7 were also modified in cells expressing a mutated CFTR. Therefore, there appears to be a direct involvement of TRPM7 in CF physiopathology. Finally, we propose that the TRPM7 activator Naltriben is a new potentiator for G551D-CFTR as the function of this mutant increases upon activation of TRPM7 by Naltriben.

Introduction

Cystic fibrosis (CF), one of the most common fatal hereditary disorders in Caucasians, is caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator ( CFTR ) gene on chromosome 7 [ 1 – 3 ]. Translation of CFTR mRNA results is a 1480 residue with a predicted molecular mass of 168 kilodaltons (kDa) [ 2 ]. CFTR is a multidomain adenosine triphosphate-binding cassette (ABC) protein responsible for the regulation of chloride (Cl − ) transmembrane transport, as well as many other ions such as halides (permeation sequence P I > P Br > P Cl > P F ; [ 4 ]) and polyatomic anions [ 5 ], and also to some small uncharged molecules [ 6 ]. Also, CFTR function is critical in maintaining fluid homeostasis, airway fluid clearance and airway submucosal glands secretion [ 7 , 8 ].

The most common mutation causing CF is a deletion of a phenylalanine residue at position 508 (ΔF508-CFTR), which is responsible for 70–80 % of CF phenotypes worldwide [ 8 – 10 ]. The ΔF508-CFTR protein is misfolded, retained in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and prematurely degraded. The limited amount of ΔF508-CFTR protein that reaches the plasma membrane is unstable, resulting in a rapid redirection from endosomal recycling towards lysosomal delivery and degradation [ 11 – 13 ]. Another mutation, Gly551Asp (G551D) also called “the Celtic mutation”, accounts for 4–5 % of alleles, and exhibits normal protein expression and cell surface localization. Nevertheless, it is associated with a severe form of CF pathology as Cl − channel function is lacking [ 14 – 17 ].

Under normal conditions, wildtype CFTR (WT-CFTR) is a Cl − channel activated by protein kinases A and C (PKA and PKC) and deactivated by dephosphorylation by a high number of protein phosphatases [ 15 , 16 ]. WT-CFTR is also regulated by protein–protein interactions involving synaptosomal-associated protein 23 (SNAP23) and syntaxin 1A, Na + /H + exchanger regulatory factor (NHERF), CFTR-associated protein of 70 kDa (CAP70), CFTR–associated ligand (CAL) and annexin A5 [ 20 – 28 ]. CFTR is also regulated by divalent cations, the most studied being calcium (Ca 2+ ) ions. Indeed, it was clearly reported that Ca 2+ homeostasis is altered in CF [ 29 ]. An abnormal spatial diffusion of Ca 2+ in airway epithelial cells derived from CF patients with the ΔF508-CFTR mutation was observed, due to an accumulation of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) in the ER [ 30 ] and to dysfunction Ca 2+ uptake in mitochondria [ 31 ]. An increased Ca 2+ uptake is a hallmark of CF [ 32 ], but when the function of CFTR is restored, for example using Miglustat, Ca 2+ homeostasis is normalized [ 33 ]. Intracellular magnesium ([Mg 2+ ] i ) is also important for the regulation of CFTR. The use of ionophore A23187 or ionomycine in human bronchial cells increases [Mg 2+ ] i and leads to a time- and dose-dependent decrease in the expression of CFTR mRNA [ 34 ]. By contrast, decreased [Mg 2+ ] i leads to reduced opening and closing rates of the CFTR channel [ 34 ]. In fact, [Mg 2+ ] i controls the closing rate of CFTR, likely in conjuction with ATP. It is well established that ATP hydrolysis by nucleotide binding domain 2 (NBD2) of CFTR is decreased when [Mg 2+ ] i is also decreased [ 35 ], the role of Mg-ATP upon CFTR’s function being more efficient than that of ATP alone [ 36 ].

Due to the fact that Mg 2+ has to be finely regulated within cells for optimal CFTR expression and function, our aim was to study the melastatin-like transient receptor potential cation channel, subfamily M, member 7 (TRPM7) in non-transfected Hela cells (NT) and in cells expressing WT-CFTR, ΔF508-CFTR and G551D-CFTR. TRPM7, which is a member of the melastatin-like transient receptor potential cation channel, subfamily M (TRPM) family, is ubiquitously expressed and possesses both an ion pore channel and a functional serine/threonine α-kinase domain to provide cellular influx for Ca 2+ , Mg 2+ and divalent metals [ 37 – 40 ]. Being a channel and having an enzymatic activity, TRPM7 is often called chanzyme. The TRPM7 protein, which is the main cellular regulator of [Mg 2+ ] i [ 41 ], is slightly more permeable to Mg 2+ than to Ca 2+ and is regulated by Mg 2+ or Mg-ATP [ 38 , 42 – 44 ]. Indeed, TRPM7 has the following selectivity profile for divalent cations: Zn 2+ ≈ Ni 2+ > > Ba 2+ > Co 2+ > Mg 2+ ≥ Mn 2+ ≥ Sr 2+ ≥ Cd 2+ ≥ Ca 2+ [ 43 ]. A remarkable finding being that trace divalent metal ions are significantly more permeable through TRPM7 than the dominant physiological divalent metal ions Ca 2+ and Mg 2+ [ 43 ]. Therefore, we studied the expression, the function and the channel regulation of TRPM7 by [Mg 2+ ] i in NT cells and in cells expressing WT-CFTR or mutated CFTR (ΔF508-CFTR and G551D-CFTR). The function of CFTR was further studied when TRPM7 function was modulated by specific drugs.

We show for the first time that [Mg 2+ ] i is decreased in cells expressing ΔF508-CFTR and G551D-CFTR. The protein expression of TRPM7 was increased in these cells whereas its function and Mg 2+ regulation were decreased. In order to highlight a possible functional link between TRPM7 and CFTR, TRPM7 activity was increased in cells expressing ΔF508-CFTR and G551D-CFTR by the use of Naltriben and the function of CFTR was studied. We found that the activation of TRPM7 resulted in a decreased CFTR function in ΔF508-CFTR cells and in a highly increased function in cells expressing G551D-CFTR. Mg 2+ and Ca 2+ flux through TRPM7 were found to be modulated in cells expressing mutated CFTR. We conclude that the link between TRPM7 and CFTR varies with the type of CFTR mutation. Finally, we propose that Naltriben is a new potentiator of G551D-CFTR with potential implications for CF therapy. Indeed, the TRPM7 activator Naltriben rescues the altered function associated with the G551D-CFTR mutation.

Discussion

Magnesium ions, being one of the most abundant intracellular cations present at a cellular molar concentration of 1 × 10 −2 [ 59 ], are essential for a wide variety of biochemical reactions and physiological functions. Mg 2+ is especially important for enzymes that require nucleotides (e.g. kinases, G-proteins and ATPases), as the biologically active form of ATP is the Mg-ATP complex. [Mg 2+ ] i is known to regulate the expression of CFTR. Knowing that a decrease in [Mg 2+ ] i leads to reduced opening and closing rates of the CFTR channel [ 34 ], we first estimated the Mg 2+ content of cells expressing WT-CFTR, and ΔF508-CFTR and G551D-CFTR mutants. The ΔF508 and G551D mutations were chosen because once mutant proteins reach plasma membranes, they exhibit decreased and altered Cl − channel function, independently of their membrane localisation [ 14 – 16 ]. We observed a decreased [Mg 2+ ] i in cells expressing ΔF508-CFTR or G551D-CFTR compared to that of cells expressing WT-CFTR. The effects of changes in the concentration of free Mg 2+ on the activity of CFTR Cl − channels were previously investigated and it was shown that Mg 2+ facilitates ATP binding that opens the CFTR channel [ 36 ]. Indeed, in an excised inside-out membrane patch experiment, removing Mg 2+ from the cytosolic solution reduced, but did not abolish, CFTR activity and addition of Mg 2+ restored the Cl − currents. Therefore, altered levels of [Mg 2+ ] i in cells expressing mutant CFTR could explain, at least in part, the observed altered Cl − channel functions related to some mutations of CFTR. This hypothesis is reinforced by the fact that we saw less Mg 2+ in cells expressing G551D-CFTR than in those expressing ΔF508-CFTR. This decreased [Mg 2+ ] i in cells expressing ΔF508-CFTR and G551D-CFTR can be correlated to the described specific alterations in the channel function mediated by these two mutants [ 14 – 17 , 36 , 45 , 58 ]. It was also observed that [Mg 2+ ] i is higher in cells expressing WT-CFTR compared to NT cells. This latter point led us to postulate that CFTR itself is likely involved in the regulation of intracellular Mg 2+ , as it does for Ca 2+ regulation [ 32 ]. Nevertheless, this hypothesis requires further evidence for its validation.

[Mg 2+ ] i is finely regulated by precise mechanisms that balance Mg 2+ uptake, intracellular Mg 2+ storage and Mg 2+ efflux. Whereas extremely slow turn-over of Mg 2+ across the cell plasma membrane under quiescent conditions is described, some efforts have been made to identify and characterize the complex network of Mg 2+ -specific transporters (for review [ 61 ]). The main vertebrate Mg 2+ cellular transporters identified are Ancient Conserved Domain Protein (Acdp2) [ 63 ]; Magnesium Transporter 1 (MagT1) [ 64 ]; Mitochondrial RNA splicing 2 protein (Mrs2) [ 65 ]; Claudin 16 [ 66 ]; SoLute Carrier family (SLC41A1 and A2) [ 67 , 68 ]; TRPM6 [ 69 ]; and TRPM7 [ 38 , 42 ]. We focused our study on the ubiquitous TRPM7 chanzyme, which is presented as the main [Mg 2+ ] i regulator of [ 41 ].

The quantitative mRNA analysis of TRPM7 showed that there was no difference in the presence or absence of CFTR within cells or when mutant CFTR is expressed. Therefore, the gene expression of TRPM7 itself is unlikely involved in the [Mg 2+ ] i differences that were observed. The quantitation of TRPM7 protein levels in the cells was surprising when it was correlated to the measured [Mg 2+ ] i . Indeed, low [Mg 2+ ] i in cells expressing either ΔF508-CFTR or G551D-CFTR corresponded to high levels of TRPM7 protein expression. By contrast, high [Mg 2+ ] i , which was observed in WT-CFTR experiments, correlated well to a low amount of protein. Thus, we hypothesized that the cellular localization, function, and regulation of the TRPM7 channel could be involved in the decreased [Mg 2+ ] i in the cells expressing mutant CFTR.

Immunofluorescence and biotinylation experiments showed a vesicular labelling in the cytoplasm in all three cell types, with membrane expression being mostly seen in WT-CFTR experiments. Membrane localization was lower in cells expressing ΔF508-CFTR and likely absent when G551D-CFTR was expressed. These results are consistent with previously described studies [ 37 , 41 , 70 , 71 ]. Furthermore, it was reported that TRPM7 can be translocated within cells in response to external stimulation. For example, TRPM7 accumulates within cells in response to an increased fluid flow and is localized at the plasma membrane in physiological condition, in <100 s [ 70 ]. In our experiments, the cellular modifications due to the CFTR mutations could explain the altered membrane localization of TRPM7. Furthermore, the altered membrane localization of TRPM7 in ΔF508-CFTR and mostly in G551D-CFTR cells could fully explain the decreased [Mg 2+ ] i in these cells.

Although the decreased membrane localization of TRPM7 in cells expressing either ΔF508-CFTR or G551D-CFTR is sufficient to explain decreased [Mg 2+ ] i , we studied its channel function. We observed that TRPM7 channel activity was decreased and almost abolished in ΔF508-CFTR and G551D-CFTR experiments, respectively. TRPM7 regulation by increasing Mg 2+ was also evaluated according to previous studies [ 41 – 44 ] and we found that it did not respond in cells containing mutant CFTR. As in our cell model, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Parkinson’s disease are epidemiologically linked to a severe deficiency in Mg 2+ [ 72 ]. In these disorders, a TRPM7 variant was found in some patients that produces a protein with a missense mutation (T1482I). Further analysis indicated that a recombinant T1482I-TRPM7 mutant exhibited the same kinase catalytic activity as wildtype TRPM7, with an increased sensitivity to inhibition by intracellular Mg 2+ [ 69 ]. Therefore, in our study the kinase activity of the alpha-kinase domain fused to the ion channel moiety of TRPM7 (for review, [ 44 ]) is unlikely to be involved in altering channel function and regulation. The functional interaction between the TRPM7 channel and kinase activity is poorly understood, although it has been shown that TRPM7 kinase activity is not essential for channel activation [ 39 ]. Nevertheless, it is also reported that the kinase activity of TRPM7 plays a role in modulating channel activity and that it is itself affected by Mg 2+ availability [ 41 , 42 , 44 ]. Thus, we propose that a vicious circle occurs in cells expressing mutant CFTR in which altered TRPM7 function leads to a decrease in [Mg 2+ ] i , which in turn modifies the regulation of TRPM7 channel activity.

Mg 2+ coordinates the γ phosphate of ATP and is required for hydrolysis by most enzymes [ 73 ]. Indeed, chelating Mg 2+ abolishes ATP hydrolysis [ 32 ], which is necessary for CFTR channel function [ 19 , 35 ]. Therefore, we hypothesized that the altered activity of TRPM7 presented here is linked to modifications in the function of ΔF508-CFTR and G551D-CFTR and we speculated that restoring TRPM7 function could play a positive role in the activity of CFTR. To answer this question, we performed experiments using Naltriben to activate TRPM7 [ 53 , 54 ]. Whereas Mg-ATP inhibits TRPM7 [ 38 ], it has to be used in patch-clamp experiments to measure the function of CFTR [ 19 , 36 ]. We performed these experiments in the presence of 5 mM Mg-ATP. This experimental condition permitting the electrophysiological recording of CFTR showed that TRPM7 was still active, despite a decreased function. CFTR Cl − channel function was thus recorded in the presence of a TRPM7 activator, according to previously described whole-cell methods [ 45 , 58 ]. Naltriben led to a decrease in Cl − channel activity for WT-CFTR and ΔF508-CFTR. By contrast, we observed that TRPM7 activation leads to an increased G551D-CFTR channel function. CFTR is unique amongst ion channels as it is dependent not only on PKA-mediated phosphorylation, but also on ATP binding and hydrolysis [ 74 , 75 ] by the nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs) which require Mg-ATP [ 35 ]. Mg-ATP was found to increase channel activity with a saturating effect above 1 mmol/l [ 76 ]; however, it was observed that whole-cell CFTR Cl − currents (activated by FSK) were diminished by increasing the cytosolic free Mg 2+ level, even when maintaining Mg-ATP in the cytosol above millimolar concentrations [ 77 ]. This could explain why activation of TRPM7 leads to decreased CFTR function in cells expressing WT-CFTR and ΔF508-CFTR. In G551D-CFTR experiments, [Mg 2+ ] i is much lower compared to cells expressing either WT-CFTR or ΔF508-CFTR and TRPM7 is poorly present in membranes were it exhibits very weak channel activity. Therefore, it can be postulated that the activation of TRPM7 by Naltriben leads to increased [Mg 2+ ] i that remains below the inhibitory level for CFTR. Therefore, we show here for the first time that Naltriben is a new potentiator of the G551D-CFTR mutant protein. The presented negative effect of Naltriben on the function of ΔF508-CFTR was also reported for other potentiators such as VX-770 (Ivacaftor, [ 78 ]). Indeed, whereas VX-770 treatments rescue G551D CFTR function, it inhibits functional rescue of ΔF508 CFTR and reduces the membrane stability of WT-CFTR.

The role of TRPM7 upon CFTR function is unlikely due to [Mg 2+ ] i modulation alone, but may also involve protein–protein interactions and/or the serine/threonine protein kinase domain at the distal C-terminus. Indeed, the C-terminus of TRPM7 contains a TRP box (~25 highly conserved residues) that may interact with phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP 2 , for review [ 79 ]), which activates CFTR in the complete absence of Mg 2+ [ 80 ]. Knowing that the kinase domain of TRPM7 also shows some similarity to cAMP-dependent PKA which also activates CFTR [ 18 , 19 ], TRPM7 may act on CFTR in many ways involving a multitude of protein interactions. Amongst the proteins predicted to interact with TRPM7, biochemical evidence was only identified for ANXA1, MYH9, MYH10 and PLCB1. MYH and PLCB1 were shown to be involved in CFTR localization and/or function [ 81 , 82 ]. Thus, it is clear that further experiments are required to ascertain whether altered TRPM7 function and regulation acts upon mutant CFTR or whether the converse interaction occurs.

Beside protein–protein interactions, Ca 2+ is more likely involved in the altered function and regulation of TRPM7 in CF cells, for at least three reasons. First, it was previously described that TRPM7 channels are inhibited by intracellular Ca 2+ [ 37 – 39 , 44 , 71 , 83 ]. Second, a larger mobilization of Ca 2+ ions in CF bronchial epithelial cells is well described [ 29 – 33 , 84 ]. Third, the implication of other TRP channels (TRPV5 and TRPV6) [ 82 ] in the increase of Ca 2+ influx in CF bronchial epithelial cells were studied and it was shown that this increase is mostly due to an up-regulation of TRPV6 activity. Therefore, we propose that the altered function and regulation of TRPM7 presented here are due to an increase in Ca 2+ influx in ΔF508-CFTR cells. This is reinforced by our findings where decreased [Mg 2+ ] i in cells expressing mutant CFTR is not involved in the altered function of TRPM7. In order to assess our hypothesis, we measured Ca 2+ influx via TRPM7 in cells expressing WT-CFTR, ΔF508-CFTR and G551D-CFTR. The Ca 2+ conductance of TRPM7 has been previously measured using fluorescent cation binding dyes [ 43 ], commonly using the ratiometric properties of the Ca 2+ binding dye fura-2 [ 61 ]. Based on its TRPM7 permeability and high fura-2 binding affinity, we used Mn 2+ as the quenching reagent in our assay. Measuring TRPM7-mediated Mn 2+ entry, rather than Ca 2+ , affords several advantages. First, some competing cations entry pathways [e.g., calcium-release activated calcium (CRAC) channels] are less permeable than TRPM7 to Mn 2+ . Second, CRAC channel currents can be further disconnected by avoiding Ca 2+ -deficient assay conditions, which are needed for optimal measurement of Ca 2+ influx. Third, it allowed us to realize our experiment in the presence of physiological levels of Ca 2+ and Mg 2+ [ 43 ]. Because Waixenicin A (a xenicane diterpenoid from the Hawaiian soft coral S. edmondsoni) [ 85 ] inhibits TRPM7-mediated Mn 2+ quench in a dose-dependent manner and because its inhibitory effect is strongly dependent on the intracellular Mg 2+ concentration [ 86 ], it was used, due to the observed variations in [Mg 2+ ] i among our cell types. We observed a decreased and increased Ca 2+ influx through TRPM7 in ΔF508-CFTR and G551D-CFTR, respectively. Regarding the cells expressing ΔF508-CFTR, this is in accordance with our results showing a decreased function of TRPM7 in these cells. Regarding the cells expressing G551D-CFTR, we found an increased Ca 2+ influx via TRPM7 which was not in accordance with a decreased function of the channel. Therefore, we hypothesize that in this cell type the behaviour of TRPM7 may vary among ions. This point has to be further studied. We also noticed that the drug modulation of TRPM7 by Naltriben and Waixenicin A was difficult to detect in Hela cells. In order to show that this was not due to our experimental conditions, we performed the same experiments in HEK293 cells which have a high level of TRPM7 expression [ 38 ]. In native HEK293 cells, a modulation of TRPM7 was observed. This led us to conclude that the TRPM7 modulation was altered in Hela cells expressing a mutated CFTR and that the involvement of TRPM7 in constitutive Ca 2+ influx is different among cell types. This cell-dependent contribution in constitutive Ca 2+ currents due to TRPM7 was previously suggested [ 87 ]. Indeed, it was reported that it can be difficult to detect Ca 2+ influx mediated by TRPM7 in some cells because its contribution can be small, relative to the large variety of constitutive currents [ 43 , 88 ]. Our conclusion is that TRPM7 is likely not involved in the large Ca 2+ influx described in cells expressing ΔF508-CFTR and that the described [Ca 2+ ] i overload in these cells is likely responsible for the altered function of TRPM7. Second, we show here for the first time that Ca 2+ influx via TRPM7 in cells expressing G551D-CFTR are increased.

We show here, for the first time, that the expression and function of TRPM7 are altered in cells expressing either ΔF508-CFTR or G551D-CFTR (Fig. 14 ). We also propose that there is a functional link between TRPM7 and CFTR via decreased [Mg 2+ ] i and increased Ca 2+ influx in CF cells. Hypomagnesaemia has been reported as a common feature in CF patients [ 89 ]. Mean serum magnesium range in CF patients was shown to be 0.46–1.03 mmol/L whereas the normal range is 0.74–1.1 [ 89 ]. This could explain the low levels of [Mg 2+ ] i that we observed in cells expressing the mutated CFTR. Patients who receive oral magnesium present better clinical symptoms [ 90 ]. If we hypothesize that Mg 2+ supplementation induces a decreased function of TRPM7, this could be in opposition with our results showing that its activation by Naltriben has a positive effect on the function of G551D-CFTR. Nevertheless, the mechanism of action of Mg 2+ in pulmonology is not fully understood due to a small correlation between serum and intracellular concentrations [ 90 ]. For example, [Mg 2+ ] i in erythrocytes, mononuclear cells and granulocytes do not reflect the body’s Mg 2+ store because it is primarily concentrated in muscles and bones [ 91 ]. Therefore, we propose that the effect of supplementation may be different among the type of mutation of CFTR, which is linked to variations in the localization and function of TRPM7. Our results together with the improvement of the symptoms in CF by Mg 2+ supplementation also reinforce the poor correlation between serum and intracellular concentrations of Mg 2+ .

From a pharmacological point of view, we show here that Naltriben modifies the phenotype of CFTR-expressing cells (Fig. 15 ). Interestingly, the activation of TRPM7 leads to increased G551D-CFTR function; thus, we propose that Naltriben is a new potentiator for this particular mutation.
