---
pmid: '31474367'
title: Anti-CRISPR-Associated Proteins Are Crucial Repressors of Anti-CRISPR Transcription.
authors:
- Stanley SY
- Borges AL
- Chen KH
- Swaney DL
- Krogan NJ
- Bondy-Denomy J
- Davidson AR
journal: Cell
year: '2019'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC6754177
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2019.07.046
---

# Anti-CRISPR-Associated Proteins Are Crucial Repressors of Anti-CRISPR Transcription.
**Authors:** Stanley SY, Borges AL, Chen KH, Swaney DL, Krogan NJ, Bondy-Denomy J, Davidson AR
**Journal:** Cell (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2019.07.046](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.07.046)
**PMC:** [PMC6754177](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6754177/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2019 Sep 5;178(6):1452-1464.e13. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2019.07.046. Epub 
2019 Aug 29.

Anti-CRISPR-Associated Proteins Are Crucial Repressors of Anti-CRISPR 
Transcription.

Stanley SY(1), Borges AL(2), Chen KH(3), Swaney DL(4), Krogan NJ(4), 
Bondy-Denomy J(5), Davidson AR(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(3)The J. David Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, CA 94158 USA.
(4)The J. David Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, CA 94158 USA; Quantitative 
Biosciences Institute, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, 
CA 94143, USA; Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Quantitative Biosciences Institute, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, 
Canada; Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, 
Canada. Electronic address: alan.davidson@utoronto.ca.

Phages express anti-CRISPR (Acr) proteins to inhibit CRISPR-Cas systems that 
would otherwise destroy their genomes. Most acr genes are located adjacent to 
anti-CRISPR-associated (aca) genes, which encode proteins with a 
helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif. The conservation of aca genes has served as 
a signpost for the identification of acr genes, but the function of the proteins 
encoded by these genes has not been investigated. Here we reveal that an 
acr-associated promoter drives high levels of acr transcription immediately 
after phage DNA injection and that Aca proteins subsequently repress this 
transcription. Without Aca activity, this strong transcription is lethal to a 
phage. Our results demonstrate how sufficient levels of Acr proteins accumulate 
early in the infection process to inhibit existing CRISPR-Cas complexes in the 
host cell. They also imply that the conserved role of Aca proteins is to 
mitigate the deleterious effects of strong constitutive transcription from acr 
promoters.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2019.07.046
PMCID: PMC6754177
PMID: 31474367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors have filed 
for a patent related to this work.

## Full Text

Introduction

CRISPR-Cas systems immunize bacteria and archaea against invading genetic elements like phages by incorporating short sequences of DNA from these invaders into their chromosome ( Datsenko et al., 2012 ; Levy et al., 2015 ; Yosef et al., 2012 ). These sequences are transcribed and processed into small RNAs known as CRISPR RNAs (crRNAs) that bind to CRISPR-associated (Cas) proteins to form ribonucleoprotein interference complexes. These complexes survey the cell, recognize foreign nucleic acids through complementarity with their crRNAs, and ultimately destroy them through the intrinsic nuclease activity of the Cas proteins ( Barrangou et al., 2007 ; Brouns et al., 2008 ; Garneau et al., 2010 ; Marraffini and Sontheimer, 2008 ). CRISPR-Cas systems are diverse, comprising six distinct types, each with multiple subtypes ( Makarova et al., 2015 ). In many bacteria, CRISPR-Cas systems are expressed in the absence of phage infection ( Agari et al., 2010 ; Cady et al., 2011 ; Deltcheva et al., 2011 ; Juranek et al., 2012 ; Young et al., 2012 ), ensuring that they are always primed to defend against a previously encountered phage.

In response to CRISPR-Cas, phages and other mobile genetic elements endure by encoding protein inhibitors of CRISPR-Cas systems, known as anti-CRISPRs ( Bondy-Denomy et al., 2013 ; Pawluk et al., 2016b ). Anti-CRISPRs are encoded in diverse viruses and mobile elements found in the Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, and Crenarchaeota phyla. They show a tremendous amount of sequence diversity with over 40 entirely distinct anti-CRISPR protein families now identified. Among these families are inhibitors of type I-C, I-D, I-E, I-F, II-A, II-C, and V-A systems. These anti-CRISPR proteins function by preventing CRISPR-Cas systems from recognizing foreign nucleic acids or by inhibiting their nuclease activity ( Bondy-Denomy et al., 2015 ; Chowdhury et al., 2017 ; Dong et al., 2017 ; Dong et al., 2019 ; Guo et al., 2017 ; Harrington et al., 2017 ; Knott et al., 2019 ; Pawluk et al., 2017 ; Wang et al., 2016 ).

Anti-CRISPR proteins display no common features with respect to sequence, predicted structure, or genomic location of the genes encoding them. However, anti-CRISPR genes are almost invariably found upstream of a gene encoding a protein containing a helix-turn-helix (HTH) DNA-binding domain ( Figure 1 ). Seven different families of genes encoding these HTH-containing proteins have been designated as anti-CRISPR associated ( aca ). Members of aca gene families have been identified in phages, prophages, plasmids, and conjugative elements in diverse bacterial species ( Bondy-Denomy et al., 2013 ; Marino et al., 2018 ; Pawluk et al., 2016a ; Pawluk et al., 2016b ). The ubiquity of aca genes adjacent to anti-CRISPR genes has provided a key bioinformatic tool for the identification of diverse anti-CRISPR families ( Marino et al., 2018 ; Pawluk et al., 2016a ; Pawluk et al., 2016b ), and implies that they play an important role in anti-CRISPR systems. Nevertheless, their function remains unknown.

The goal of this work was to define the role of aca genes in anti-CRISPR biology. We investigated aca gene function using Pseudomonas aeruginosa phage JBD30 as our primary model system ( Figure 1 ). This phage was among the first set of phages shown to use an anti-CRISPR gene for survival in the presence of CRISPR-Cas ( Bondy-Denomy et al., 2013 ). The anti-CRISPR operon of JBD30 and other closely related phages is located between operons encoding phage structural proteins. In JBD30, a single anti-CRISPR ( acr ) gene, acrIF1 , is followed directly by an aca gene, known as aca1 . Aca1 is conserved (>50% identity) among diverse anti-CRISPR encoding phages and prophages in Pseudomonas species ( Pawluk et al., 2016b ). Since Aca1 possesses a HTH DNA-binding motif, we reasoned that it might be involved in regulating anti-CRISPR gene transcription. To address this, we have investigated the transcript levels of the acrIF1 gene of JBD30 throughout its infection cycle. We found that anti-CRISPR transcription occurs at high level early in the phage infection process, and that Aca1 represses this transcription. Remarkably, we found that the repressor activity of Aca1 is essential for phage survival irrespective of CRISPR-Cas. We also showed that other Aca protein families act as repressors of anti-CRISPR transcription. This crucial function of Aca likely explains its ubiquity in anti-CRISPR operons.

Discussion

Given the increasing numbers of anti-CRISPR families are being discovered, we expect that they exert a strong and widespread influence on CRISPR-Cas function, and have been important drivers of CRISPR-Cas evolution. The ubiquity of the association between Aca proteins and anti-CRISPRs implies that Aca proteins play a crucial role in anti-CRISPR systems; thus, an investigation into their function was timely. Here we have shown that Aca1 is a repressor of anti-CRISPR transcription and is critical for phage particle production. Since we found no evidence that AcrIF1 is incorporated into phage particles and injected into host cells along with phage DNA, our results imply that phage survival in the face of pre-formed CRISPR-Cas complexes in the host cell is dependent upon rapid high-level transcription of the anti-CRISPR gene from a powerful promoter. However, the placement of such strong constitutive promoters within the context of a gene-dense, intricately regulated phage genome is likely to result in the dysregulation of critical genes and a decrease in fitness. The inclusion of repressors within anti-CRISPR operons to attenuate transcription once sufficient anti-CRISPR protein has accumulated solves this problem. We surmise that the widespread presence of aca genes within anti-CRISPR operons has been vital for the spread of these operons by horizontal gene transfer, allowing them to incorporate at diverse positions within phage genomes without a resulting decrease in phage viability. In addition, our work shows that Aca proteins have the potential to broadly inhibit anti-CRISPR expression, effectively acting as anti-anti-CRISPRs, which could have applications in CRISPR-based antibacterial technologies ( Greene, 2018 ; Pursey et al., 2018 ).

One question with respect to anti-CRISPR operon function is how rapid high-level expression of anti-CRISPR proteins can be achieved when a repressor of the operon is produced simultaneously. Since Aca proteins are not present when phage DNA is first injected, initial transcription of anti-CRISPR operons is not impeded. In most anti-CRISPR operons the acr genes precede the aca gene and are thus translated first, allowing anti-CRISPR proteins to accumulate earlier. In addition, the aca ribosome binding sites in the aca1 , aca2 , and aca3 controlled operons tested in this work are predicted to be considerably weaker than those of associated acr genes, which would result in slower accumulation of the Aca proteins ( Espah Borujeni et al., 2014 ; Salis et al., 2009 ; Seo et al., 2013 ). The presence of two binding sites for Aca1 in the acr promoter, only one of which mediates repression, may also serve to delay the repressive activity of Aca1. Evidence for this is seen in Figure 5A , where the replication of a phage lacking IR1 is inhibited to a greater extent than wild-type by plasmid-based expression of Aca1, presumably because Aca1 is normally titrated away from the IR2 site by binding to IR1. Other mechanisms to fine-tune the balance of anti-CRISPR and Aca protein levels, such as differential protein and/or mRNA stability, may also play a role in some cases. Another notable feature of Aca1 is its weaker DNA-binding affinity as compared to other well-known HTH repressor, such as the lambda, lac , and tet repressors, presumably making Aca proteins weaker repressors. This is likely a functional requirement of Aca proteins as some level of anti-CRISPR transcription is necessary for the survival of prophages, which would be targets of host CRISPR-Cas systems in the absence of anti-CRISPR activity.

In the case of phage JBD30, the absence of Aca1 function led to a dramatic increase in acr operon transcription and abrogation of phage particle production. This loss of viability appeared, at least in part, to result from a large decrease in the transcription of essential genes downstream of the acr operon ( Figure 4C ). We believe that this decrease is caused by readthrough transcription from the acr promoter, a conclusion supported by the rescue of phage viability upon insertion of a transcriptional terminator downstream of the aca1 R44A gene. In an interesting parallel, strong transcriptional readthrough from early promoters in E. coli phage T7 is lethal if it is not attenuated by a phage protein that inhibits E. coli RNA polymerase ( Savalia et al., 2010 ). Although it seems counterintuitive that strong upstream transcription would attenuate downstream transcription, this type of transcriptional interference has been shown to result from RNA polymerase pausing over downstream promoters, dislodgement of transcription factors, or DNA supercoiling effects from high rates of transcription ( Hao et al., 2017 ; Liu and Wang, 1987 ; Palmer et al., 2009 ; Palmer et al., 2011 ; Scheirer and Higgins, 2001 ).

Another question is why would anti-CRISPR operons include a repressor to decrease transcription rather than a strong downstream transcriptional terminator to prevent readthrough transcription. Depending on where an acr operon has been inserted, transcription may need to proceed through the anti-CRISPR region for essential genes to be transcribed. Thus, inserting a terminator could be detrimental. Additionally, maintaining a very high level of transcription would unnecessarily sap host resources. Consistent with this idea, highly expressed genes have generally been found to have a lower likelihood of horizontal transfer because of their greater potential to disrupt recipient physiology ( Park and Zhang, 2012 ; Sorek et al., 2007 ). Our observation that terminator insertion did not completely rescue the aca1 R44A mutant also suggests that unrestrained transcription from the acr promoter may reduce viability through other mechanisms. In general, we expect that strong anti-CRISPR-associated promoters would reduce evolutionary fitness when placed in most locations within mobile DNA elements if these promoters were unregulated. Reductions in fitness could be due to various mechanisms of gene misregulation depending upon the specific insertional position of the acr operon. The great diversity of acr operon insertion points in mobile elements is emphasized by the distinct locations observed for nine different acr operons controlled by Aca2 ( Figure S7A ). It can be seen that the acr promoter/ aca operator regions and Aca2 coding regions of these operons are remarkably conserved at the nucleotide level, while the Acr encoding regions in between are highly diverse ( Figure S7B ), highlighting the importance of Aca regulation of the acr promoter. It was recently shown that anti-CRISPR-expressing phages like JBD30 cooperate to inhibit CRISPR-Cas systems. Initial phage infections may not result in successful phage replication, but anti-CRISPR protein accumulating from infections aborted by CRISPR-Cas activity leads to “immunosuppression” that aids in subsequent phage infections ( Borges et al., 2018 ; Landsberger et al., 2018 ). Through demonstrating that anti-CRISPR genes are expressed quickly after infection, we provide an explanation for how anti-CRISPR protein accumulates even when phage genomes are ultimately destroyed by the CRISPR-Cas system. In the anti-CRISPR-expressing archaeal virus, SIRV2, the acrID1 gene was also transcribed at high levels early in infection, supporting the generalizability of this mechanism of anti-CRISPR action ( Quax et al., 2013 ).

anti-CRISPR locus introduction into JBD44

The anti-CRISPR locus of phage JBD30 was PCR amplified and cloned as a SalI restriction fragment into the transposon of pBTK30 ( Goodman et al., 2004 ). This construct was transformed into E. coli SM10λpir. Conjugation was then used to move the transposon into a JBD44 lysogen of PA14. Following conjugation, lysogens were grown to log phase (OD 600 = 0.5) and prophages were induced with mitomycin C (3 μg mL −1 ). Lysates were plated on lawns of PA14 expressing a crRNA targeting phage JBD44 from pHERD30T to isolate phages carrying and expressing the anti-CRISPR locus.
