---
pmid: '17476307'
title: BRCA2 is required for neurogenesis and suppression of medulloblastoma.
authors:
- Frappart PO
- Lee Y
- Lamont J
- McKinnon PJ
journal: EMBO J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC1888666
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601703
---

# BRCA2 is required for neurogenesis and suppression of medulloblastoma.
**Authors:** Frappart PO, Lee Y, Lamont J, McKinnon PJ
**Journal:** EMBO J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601703](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601703)
**PMC:** [PMC1888666](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1888666/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2007 Jun 6;26(11):2732-42. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601703. Epub 2007
May  3.

BRCA2 is required for neurogenesis and suppression of medulloblastoma.

Frappart PO(1), Lee Y, Lamont J, McKinnon PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Tumor Cell Biology, St Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Defective DNA damage responses in the nervous system can result in 
neurodegeneration or tumorigenesis. Despite the importance of DNA damage 
signalling, the neural function of many critical DNA repair factors is unclear. 
BRCA2 is necessary for homologous recombination repair of DNA and the prevention 
of diseases including Fanconi Anemia and cancer. We determined the role of BRCA2 
during brain development by inactivating murine Brca2 throughout neural tissues. 
In striking contrast to early embryonic lethality after germ-line inactivation, 
Brca2(LoxP/LoxP);Nestin-cre mice were viable. However, Brca2 loss profoundly 
affected neurogenesis, particularly during embryonic and postnatal neural 
development. These neurological defects arose from DNA damage as 
Brca2(LoxP/LoxP);Nestin-cre mice showed extensive gammaH2AX in neural tissue and 
p53 deficiency restored brain histology but lead to rapid formation of 
medulloblastoma brain tumors. In contrast, loss of the Atm kinase did not 
markedly attenuate apoptosis after Brca2 loss, but did partially restore 
cerebellar morphology, supporting a genomic surveillance function for ATM during 
neurogenesis. These data illustrate the importance of Brca2 during nervous 
system development and underscore the tissue-specific requirements for DNA 
repair factors.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601703
PMCID: PMC1888666
PMID: 17476307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Defective DNA damage responses in the nervous system can result in neurodegeneration or tumorigenesis. Despite the importance of DNA damage signalling, the neural function of many critical DNA repair factors is unclear. BRCA2 is necessary for homologous recombination repair of DNA and the prevention of diseases including Fanconi Anemia and cancer. We determined the role of BRCA2 during brain development by inactivating murine Brca2 throughout neural tissues. In striking contrast to early embryonic lethality after germ-line inactivation, Brca2 LoxP/LoxP ;Nestin-cre mice were viable. However, Brca2 loss profoundly affected neurogenesis, particularly during embryonic and postnatal neural development. These neurological defects arose from DNA damage as Brca2 LoxP/LoxP ;Nestin-cre mice showed extensive γH2AX in neural tissue and p53 deficiency restored brain histology but lead to rapid formation of medulloblastoma brain tumors. In contrast, loss of the Atm kinase did not markedly attenuate apoptosis after Brca2 loss, but did partially restore cerebellar morphology, supporting a genomic surveillance function for ATM during neurogenesis. These data illustrate the importance of Brca2 during nervous system development and underscore the tissue-specific requirements for DNA repair factors.

Introduction

Within the nervous system, appropriate responses to DNA damage are required to maintain homeostasis and prevent disease ( McMurray, 2005 ; Lee and McKinnon, 2006 ). DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) trigger a signalling cascade that leads to repair and resolution of the break, or as is frequent in the developing nervous system, apoptosis. The repair of DNA DSBs occurs via two mechanistically distinct pathways non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) or homologous recombination (HR). Each pathway involves a distinct repertoire of repair enzymes and associated proteins. HR requires a group of RAD51-related proteins and a variety of other factors, including BRCA2, to ensure high-fidelity DNA repair using an undamaged homologous DNA template to replace an adjacent damaged one ( Thompson and Schild, 2002 ; West, 2003 ). In contrast, NHEJ facilitates direct modification and ligation of the two DNA ends at the DSB. Efficient NHEJ requires among other factors, KU heterodimers (KU 70 and KU 80), DNA-PKcs, DNA ligase IV (LIG4) and XRCC4 ( Lees-Miller and Meek, 2003 ; Lieber et al , 2003 ; Mills et al , 2003 ; O'Driscoll and Jeggo, 2006 ). Inactivation of either of these pathways in mice can lead to embryonic lethality or tumor development.

Broad insights illuminating DNA repair and nervous system development have been gained from mice in which gene targeting has disabled various DNA repair pathways ( Friedberg and Meira, 2006 ). For example, inactivation of NHEJ in the mouse can lead to defective neurogenesis or brain tumors depending on the particular gene disruption and genetic background ( Gao et al , 1998 , 2000 ; Lee and McKinnon, 2002 ; Yan et al , 2006 ). Disruption of HR can also affect neural development ( Deans et al , 2000 ; Orii et al , 2006 ), although when some key HR components such as Brca2 or Rad51 are inactivated, the result is early embryonic lethality during gastrulation (before neural development) ( Lim and Hasty, 1996 ; Tsuzuki et al , 1996 ; Ludwig et al , 1997 ; Sharan et al , 1997 ; Suzuki et al , 1997 ). Moreover, DNA repair activity exhibits a clear tissue- and cell type specificity, as in the nervous system, HR only functions in proliferating cells, while NHEJ is particularly important in differentiated neural cells ( Orii et al , 2006 ). Together, these data show that DNA DSB repair pathways operate in a complementary manner during neural development.

BRCA2 has a key role in HR and substantial DNA repair-associated defects result from its inactivation, including DNA damage hypersensitivity, chromosomal rearrangements and defective mammalian gametogenesis ( Sharan et al , 1997 ; Tutt and Ashworth, 2002 ; Yang et al , 2002 ; Daniels et al , 2004 ). BRCA2 is a large protein of 3418 amino acids that physically interacts through its carboxyl terminus with RAD51, a protein essential for HR, and is responsible for the translocation of RAD51 to sites of DNA damage processing ( Powell et al , 2002 ; Pellegrini and Venkitaraman, 2004 ; Shivji and Venkitaraman, 2004 ; Yang et al , 2005 ). BRCA2 has also been implicated in cell-cycle regulation via interaction with BRAF35 or Smad3 ( Marmorstein et al , 2001 ; Preobrazhenska et al , 2002 ), and a role during an intra-S phase checkpoint has also been reported ( Taniguchi et al , 2002 ). Brca2 functions as a tumor suppressor, as its loss confers susceptibility to breast, ovarian and brain tumors ( Hughes-Davies et al , 2003 ; Offit et al , 2003 ; Shivji and Venkitaraman, 2004 ). The BRCA2-binding protein BALB2 is important for the tumor suppressor function of BRCA2 ( Xia et al , 2006 ; Erkko et al , 2007 ; Rahman et al , 2007 ).

Biallelic hypomorphic mutations of BRCA2 are also responsible for some cases of Fanconi Anemia (FA), a rare autosomal recessive cancer susceptibility syndrome characterized by congenital abnormalities, progressive bone narrow failure and cellular hypersensitivity to DNA cross-linking agents ( Kennedy and D'Andrea, 2005 ; Taniguchi and D'Andrea, 2006 ). FA results from inactivating mutations in any one of a multiprotein complex that functions during DNA repair ( D'Andrea, 2003 ; Kennedy and D'Andrea, 2005 ). FA patients carrying BRCA2 mutations exhibit a more severe phenotype compared with other FA groups, including predisposition to medulloblastoma brain tumors ( Offit et al , 2003 ; Shivji and Venkitaraman, 2004 ). Defects in the BRCA2 partner-protein PALB2 can also result in FA ( Reid et al , 2007 ; Xia et al , 2007 ).

Given the importance of BRCA2 during HR and the lethality associated with germ-line inactivation, we used conditional gene inactivation via Cre/LoxP technology to determine the requirement for Brca2 during neural development. Inactivation of Brca2 resulted in microcephaly associated with defects in neurogenesis particularly during cerebellar development. Loss of Brca2 also led to medulloblastoma when p53 was disabled. Thus, Brca2 fulfils a critical role during nervous system development, highlighting the tissue-specific requirements for DNA repair during neurogenesis.

Discussion

Repair of DNA via HR is critical for maintenance of genomic integrity, and BRCA2 is a central component of this pathway ( West, 2003 ; Pellegrini and Venkitaraman, 2004 ). Cells lacking BRCA2 show pronounced genetic instability and susceptibility to DNA damaging agents, while BRCA2 mutations predispose to breast, ovarian and prostate cancer ( Tutt and Ashworth, 2002 ; Shivji and Venkitaraman, 2004 ). Initial in vivo studies revealed that germ-line deletion of Brca2 in the mouse was lethal at E6 ( Ludwig et al , 1997 ; Sharan et al , 1997 ; Suzuki et al , 1997 ; Patel et al , 1998 ; Jonkers et al , 2001 ). While this finding pointed to the critical importance of Brca2, the early lethality precluded spatiotemporal analysis of this protein's function during development. In this current report, we find that in contrast to germ-line inactivation, Brca2 Nes-cre mice are viable. Notwithstanding this, it is clear that Brca2 fulfils an important role during neurogenesis, as Brca2 Nes-cre mice are microcephalic and exhibit altered neural development arising from the effects of chronic genotoxic stress. Brca2 is also required to suppress the formation of medulloblastoma brain tumors. These data highlight the importance of Brca2 during normal neural development for maintaining genomic stability and uncover novel tissue-specific requirements for this DNA repair factor.

Inactivation of many important DNA repair genes including Brca2 , Mre11 , Nbs1 or Rad51 disrupts gastrulation and therefore tissue formation, making broader biological interpretation of gene loss problematic ( Friedberg and Meira, 2006 ). In other cases, disruption of DNA repair genes such as Xrcc4 , Lig4 or Xrcc2 while also resulting in lethality do allow more substantial embryonic development, leading to phenotypes associated with DNA damage effects in specific tissue regions during development ( Barnes et al , 1998 ; Frank et al , 1998 ; Gao et al , 1998 ; Orii et al , 2006 ). Bypassing embryonic lethality, via tissue-specific gene inactivation, provides unique functional insights and is an essential counterpoint for comparative analyses of other conditional DNA repair mouse mutants and myriad cellular in vitro studies.

This point is illustrated by comparing our current study with Brca2 to neural inactivation of Nbs1, where an overlapping but different phenotype was observed ( Frappart et al , 2005 ). NBS1 is important for DNA DSB repair because Nijmegen Breakage syndrome individuals are radiosensitive, predisposed to tumors and isolated cells are hypersensitive to DNA DSB-inducing agents ( Shiloh, 1997 ; Digweed and Sperling, 2004 ). Two important differences distinguish our current study from the Nbs1 Nes-cre conditional mutant mice; these are the lack of overt proliferation defects and the occurrence of medulloblastoma in Brca2 Nes-cre animals. Neural inactivation of Nbs1 leads to substantial impairment of proliferation of granule neuron progenitor cells resulting in increased apoptosis in post-mitotic neurons primarily in the cerebellum ( Frappart et al , 2005 ). However, the impressive phenotypic rescue of the Nbs1 Nes-cre cerebellum by p53 loss does not result in medulloblastoma. This contrasting phenotype between DNA DSB repair factors could reflect different cellular roles, whereby NBS1 may be critical for monitoring DNA breaks during DNA replication possibly in collaboration with ATR ( Pichierri and Rosselli, 2004 ; Stiff et al , 2005 ), while BRCA2 functions primarily to repair DNA DSBs during HR. Notably however, NBS1 is reportedly essential for HR ( Tauchi et al , 2002 ; Yang et al , 2006 ), so the different phenotypes between Nbs1 Nes-cre and Brca2 Nes-cre may relate to cell- or tissue-specific effects, that the damage induced by Nbs1 loss is more severe or could indicate that NBS1 does not participate in HR in a physiological setting.

Although Brca2 is clearly important for maintenance of DNA integrity in proliferating granule neuron precursor cells, partial rescue of the Brca2 Nes-cre cerebellar phenotype occurs in Brca2 Nes-cre ;Atm −/− animals. Because Atm is not required for DNA damage signalling after disruption of HR in vivo ( Orii et al , 2006 ; Adam et al , 2007 ), it is most likely that Atm-dependent apoptosis eliminates post-mitotic granule cells with unrepaired DNA damage (resulting from Brca2 loss during proliferation) to prevent migration of these cells to the inner granule layer. The kinase responsible for signalling DNA damage in the proliferative neural populations may well be the ATM-related kinase, ATR ( Shiloh, 2003 ). While Atm involvement during cerebellar development in Nbs1 Nes-cre mice has not been reported, the synthetic lethality between Nbs1 Δ B/ Δ B and Atm −/− mice ( Williams et al , 2002 ) may make interpretation of this compound genetic background difficult, potentially further highlighting the different roles these respective DNA repair factors fulfil during development.

We also found that Brca2 was a potent tumor suppressor in the brain. When Brca2 Nes-cre was introduced onto a p53 deficient background (either p53 +/− or p53 −/− ), most mice succumbed to brain tumors, resulting from enhanced DNA damage during proliferation in the EGL. Previous studies showed that medulloblastoma can occur when DNA DSB repair factors are disabled, as loss of NHEJ in collaboration with defective p53 signalling led to this type of tumor, although in those cases, no tumors were reported in p53 heterozygotes ( Gao et al , 1998 , 2000 ; Lee and McKinnon, 2002 ; Yan et al , 2006 ). The high incidence of medulloblastoma in Brca2 Nes-cre ; p53 +/− mice probably reflects the more severe effects of Brca2 disruption toward genomic integrity. Importantly, the human FA syndrome, which results from Brca2 mutations (FANCD1), also develops medulloblastoma ( Offit et al , 2003 ), and microcephaly is a prevalent feature of FA ( Gennery et al , 2004 ), indicating that Brca2 loss in the mouse recapitulates the neural aspects of this disease. Similar to other mutations common in human medulloblastoma, we found that the Ptch1 was generally lost in the Brca2 Nes-cre ; p53 −/− medulloblastoma, while N-Myc was often amplified (data not shown). Loss of p53, or the p53 pathway, also features strongly in human medulloblastoma ( Woodburn et al , 2001 ; Giordana et al , 2002 ; Lee et al , 2003 ; Frank et al , 2004 ), underscoring the relevance of the Brca2 Nes-cre ; p53 −/− model to human disease. Maintenance of genomic integrity by Brca2 is also likely to be critical for prevention of other brain tumor types in addition to medulloblastoma.

Our data help to clarify the relative developmental contributions of DNA damage response factors in a biological setting, and indicate that genomic stability is critical for proper neural development. As more tissue-restricted DNA repair mutant mice are generated, we will further determine the relationship between different DNA repair pathways during development, thereby providing a biological context for understanding the interplay of DNA repair factors and their role in preventing disease.
