---
pmid: '18632486'
title: Clinical utility of novel agents in the treatment of central venous catheter
  occlusion.
authors:
- Reddy GK
journal: Support Cancer Ther
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.3816/SCT.2006.n.010
---

# Clinical utility of novel agents in the treatment of central venous catheter occlusion.
**Authors:** Reddy GK
**Journal:** Support Cancer Ther (2006)
**DOI:** [10.3816/SCT.2006.n.010](https://doi.org/10.3816/SCT.2006.n.010)

## Abstract

1. Support Cancer Ther. 2006 Apr 1;3(3):135-9. doi: 10.3816/SCT.2006.n.010.

Clinical utility of novel agents in the treatment of central venous catheter 
occlusion.

Reddy GK(1).

Author information:
(1)CIG Media Group, LP, Dallas, TX.

Central venous catheter (CVC) occlusion occurs frequently and remains a 
significant clinical problem in patients with cancer receiving infusional or 
intravenous chemotherapy. Thrombotic occlusions frequently limit the benefits of 
potentially curable cytotoxic agents by interrupting the delivery of infusion of 
chemotherapy, intravenous medication, nutritional support, and blood products, 
as well as the frequent acquisition of venous blood samples for laboratory 
testing. Urokinase has been used as a thrombolytic agent for dysfunctional 
occluded CVCs, but the alterations in manufacturing practice prompted the Food 
and Drug Administration to suspend further production of urokinase in 1999. 
Although streptokinase had a potential as a thrombolytic agent in place of 
urokinase, the risk of life-threatening anaphylaxis associated with this agent 
prompted researchers to look for newer agents to dissolve CVC occlusions. 
Several novel thrombolytic agents are currently being evaluated as a potential 
treatment for patients with CVC occlusions and acute or chronic peripheral 
arterial occlusions. Alfimeprase, a recombinant fibrinolytic zinc 
metalloprotease, has shown promising clinical utility in blood clot lysis in 
patients with CVC occlusions and peripheral arterial occlusions. Based on the 
encouraging data, alfimeprase has received orphan drug designation from the Food 
and Drug Administration and the Committee for Orphan Medicinal Products of the 
European Medicines Agency for the evaluation of acute peripheral arterial 
occlusions as a potential indication. Other novel thrombolytic agents such as 
alteplase and reteplase are undergoing clinical evaluation for their utility in 
restoring the function of occluded CVCs. The clinical potency of these novel 
agents and their ongoing clinical trials are discussed briefly herein.

DOI: 10.3816/SCT.2006.n.010
PMID: 18632486
