---
pmid: '17934516'
title: The interaction of the SRA domain of ICBP90 with a novel domain of DNMT1 is
  involved in the regulation of VEGF gene expression.
authors:
- Achour M
- Jacq X
- Rondé P
- Alhosin M
- Charlot C
- Chataigneau T
- Jeanblanc M
- Macaluso M
- Giordano A
- Hughes AD
- Schini-Kerth VB
- Bronner C
journal: Oncogene
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210855
---

# The interaction of the SRA domain of ICBP90 with a novel domain of DNMT1 is involved in the regulation of VEGF gene expression.
**Authors:** Achour M, Jacq X, Rondé P, Alhosin M, Charlot C, Chataigneau T, Jeanblanc M, Macaluso M, Giordano A, Hughes AD, Schini-Kerth VB, Bronner C
**Journal:** Oncogene (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1210855](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1210855)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2008 Apr 3;27(15):2187-97. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210855. Epub 2007
Oct  15.

The interaction of the SRA domain of ICBP90 with a novel domain of DNMT1 is 
involved in the regulation of VEGF gene expression.

Achour M(1), Jacq X, Rondé P, Alhosin M, Charlot C, Chataigneau T, Jeanblanc M, 
Macaluso M, Giordano A, Hughes AD, Schini-Kerth VB, Bronner C.

Author information:
(1)Institut Gilbert-Laustriat, UMR 7175 CNRS/Université Louis Pasteur 
(Strasbourg I), Départment de Pharmacologie et Physicochimie, Faculté de 
Pharmacie, Illkirch, France.

Inverted CCAAT box-binding protein of 90 kDa (ICBP90) is over-expressed in 
several types of cancer, including breast, prostate and lung cancers. In search 
for proteins that interact with the set and ring-associated (SRA) domain of 
ICBP90, we used the two-hybrid system and screened a placental cDNA library. 
Several clones coding for a new domain of DNMT1 were found. The interaction, 
between the ICBP90 SRA domain and the DNMT1 domain, has been confirmed with 
purified proteins by glutathione-S-transferase pull-down experiments. We checked 
whether ICBP90 and DNMT1 are present in the same macro-molecular complexes in 
Jurkat cells and immortalized human vascular smooth muscle cells (HVTs-SM1). 
Co-immunoprecipitation experiments showed that ICBP90 and DNMT1 are present in 
the same molecular complex, which was further confirmed by co-localization 
experiments as assessed by immunocytochemistry. Downregulation of ICBP90 and 
DNMT1 decreased VEGF gene expression, a major pro-angiogenic factor, whereas 
those of p16(INK4A) gene and RB1 gene were significantly enhanced. Together, 
these results indicate that DNMT1 and ICBP90 are involved in VEGF gene 
expression, possibly via an interaction of the SRA domain of ICBP90 with a novel 
domain of DNMT1 and an upregulation of p16(INK4A). They further suggest a new 
role of ICBP90 in the relationship between histone ubiquitination and DNA 
methylation in the context of tumoral angiogenesis and tumour suppressor genes 
silencing.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210855
PMID: 17934516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
