---
pmid: '7929391'
title: JAK1 kinase forms complexes with interleukin-4 receptor and 4PS/insulin receptor
  substrate-1-like protein and is activated by interleukin-4 and interleukin-9 in
  T lymphocytes.
authors:
- Yin T
- Tsang ML
- Yang YC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
---

# JAK1 kinase forms complexes with interleukin-4 receptor and 4PS/insulin receptor substrate-1-like protein and is activated by interleukin-4 and interleukin-9 in T lymphocytes.
**Authors:** Yin T, Tsang ML, Yang YC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1994)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Oct 28;269(43):26614-7.

JAK1 kinase forms complexes with interleukin-4 receptor and 4PS/insulin receptor 
substrate-1-like protein and is activated by interleukin-4 and interleukin-9 in 
T lymphocytes.

Yin T(1), Tsang ML, Yang YC.

Author information:
(1)Walther Oncology Center, Indiana University Medical Center, Indianapolis 
46202.

Interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-9 regulate the proliferation of T lymphocytes through 
interactions with their receptors. Previous studies have shown that unknown 
tyrosine kinases are involved in the proliferative signaling triggered by IL-4 
and IL-9. Here we show that IL-4 and IL-9 induce overlapping (170, 130, and 125 
kilodalton (kDa)) and distinct (45 and 88/90 kDa, respectively) protein tyrosine 
phosphorylation in T lymphocytes. We further identify the 170-kDa 
tyrosine-phosphorylated protein as 4PS/insulin receptor substrate-1-like 
(IRS-1L) protein and 130-kDa protein as JAK1 kinase. Furthermore, we demonstrate 
for the first time that JAK1 forms complexes with the IL-4 receptor and 
4PS/IRS-1L protein following ligand-receptor interaction. In addition, we 
demonstrate that IL-9, but not IL-4, induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat 91 
transcriptional factor. The overlapping and distinct protein tyrosine 
phosphorylation and activation of the same JAK1 kinase in T lymphocytes strongly 
suggests that IL-4 and IL-9 share the common signal transduction pathways and 
that the specificity for each cytokine could be achieved through the unique 
tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins triggered by individual cytokines.

PMID: 7929391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
