---
pmid: '8036495'
title: The three-dimensional crystal structure of the catalytic core of cellobiohydrolase
  I from Trichoderma reesei.
authors:
- Divne C
- Ståhlberg J
- Reinikainen T
- Ruohonen L
- Pettersson G
- Knowles JK
- Teeri TT
- Jones TA
journal: Science
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.8036495
---

# The three-dimensional crystal structure of the catalytic core of cellobiohydrolase I from Trichoderma reesei.
**Authors:** Divne C, Ståhlberg J, Reinikainen T, Ruohonen L, Pettersson G, Knowles JK, Teeri TT, Jones TA
**Journal:** Science (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.8036495](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.8036495)

## Abstract

1. Science. 1994 Jul 22;265(5171):524-8. doi: 10.1126/science.8036495.

The three-dimensional crystal structure of the catalytic core of 
cellobiohydrolase I from Trichoderma reesei.

Divne C(1), Ståhlberg J, Reinikainen T, Ruohonen L, Pettersson G, Knowles JK, 
Teeri TT, Jones TA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Uppsala University, Sweden.

Cellulose is the major polysaccharide of plants where it plays a predominantly 
structural role. A variety of highly specialized microorganisms have evolved to 
produce enzymes that either synergistically or in complexes can carry out the 
complete hydrolysis of cellulose. The structure of the major cellobiohydrolase, 
CBHI, of the potent cellulolytic fungus Trichoderma reesei has been determined 
and refined to 1.8 angstrom resolution. The molecule contains a 40 angstrom long 
active site tunnel that may account for many of the previously poorly understood 
macroscopic properties of the enzyme and its interaction with solid cellulose. 
The active site residues were identified by solving the structure of the enzyme 
complexed with an oligosaccharide, o-iodobenzyl-1-thio-beta-cellobioside. The 
three-dimensional structure is very similar to a family of bacterial 
beta-glucanases with the main-chain topology of the plant legume lectins.

DOI: 10.1126/science.8036495
PMID: 8036495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
