---
pmid: '22144463'
title: RNA elimination machinery targeting meiotic mRNAs promotes facultative heterochromatin
  formation.
authors:
- Zofall M
- Yamanaka S
- Reyes-Turcu FE
- Zhang K
- Rubin C
- Grewal SI
journal: Science
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC6338074
doi: 10.1126/science.1211651
---

# RNA elimination machinery targeting meiotic mRNAs promotes facultative heterochromatin formation.
**Authors:** Zofall M, Yamanaka S, Reyes-Turcu FE, Zhang K, Rubin C, Grewal SI
**Journal:** Science (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1211651](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1211651)
**PMC:** [PMC6338074](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6338074/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2012 Jan 6;335(6064):96-100. doi: 10.1126/science.1211651. Epub 2011 
Dec 1.

RNA elimination machinery targeting meiotic mRNAs promotes facultative 
heterochromatin formation.

Zofall M(1), Yamanaka S, Reyes-Turcu FE, Zhang K, Rubin C, Grewal SI.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Facultative heterochromatin that changes during cellular differentiation 
coordinates regulated gene expression, but its assembly is poorly understood. 
Here, we describe facultative heterochromatin islands in fission yeast and show 
that their formation at meiotic genes requires factors that eliminate meiotic 
messenger RNAs (mRNAs) during vegetative growth. Blocking production of meiotic 
mRNA or loss of RNA elimination factors, including Mmi1 and Red1 proteins, 
abolishes heterochromatin islands. RNA elimination machinery is enriched at 
meiotic loci and interacts with Clr4/SUV39h, a methyltransferase involved in 
heterochromatin assembly. Heterochromatin islands disassemble in response to 
nutritional signals that induce sexual differentiation. This process involves 
the antisilencing factor Epe1, the loss of which causes dramatic increase in 
heterochromatic loci. Our analyses uncover unexpected regulatory roles for 
mRNA-processing factors that assemble dynamic heterochromatin to modulate gene 
expression.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1211651
PMCID: PMC6338074
PMID: 22144463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Facultative heterochromatin that changes during cellular differentiation coordinates regulated gene expression, but its assembly is poorly understood. Here, we describe facultative heterochromatin islands in fission yeast and show that their formation at meiotic genes requires factors that eliminate meiotic messenger RNAs (mRNAs) during vegetative growth. Blocking production of meiotic mRNA or loss of RNA elimination factors, including Mmi1 and Red1 proteins, abolishes heterochromatin islands. RNA elimination machinery is enriched at meiotic loci and interacts with Clr4/SUV39h, a methyltransferase involved in heterochromatin assembly. Heterochromatin islands disassemble in response to nutritional signals that induce sexual differentiation. This process involves the antisilencing factor Epe1, the loss of which causes dramatic increase in heterochromatic loci. Our analyses uncover unexpected regulatory roles for mRNA-processing factors that assemble dynamic heterochromatin to modulate gene expression.
