---
pmid: '18805093'
title: A double S shape provides the structural basis for the extraordinary binding
  specificity of Dscam isoforms.
authors:
- Sawaya MR
- Wojtowicz WM
- Andre I
- Qian B
- Wu W
- Baker D
- Eisenberg D
- Zipursky SL
journal: Cell
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC2701508
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.07.042
---

# A double S shape provides the structural basis for the extraordinary binding specificity of Dscam isoforms.
**Authors:** Sawaya MR, Wojtowicz WM, Andre I, Qian B, Wu W, Baker D, Eisenberg D, Zipursky SL
**Journal:** Cell (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2008.07.042](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2008.07.042)
**PMC:** [PMC2701508](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2701508/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2008 Sep 19;134(6):1007-18. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.07.042.

A double S shape provides the structural basis for the extraordinary binding 
specificity of Dscam isoforms.

Sawaya MR(1), Wojtowicz WM, Andre I, Qian B, Wu W, Baker D, Eisenberg D, 
Zipursky SL.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, UCLA-DOE Institute of Genomics and 
Proteomics, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Drosophila Dscam encodes a vast family of immunoglobulin (Ig)-containing 
proteins that exhibit isoform-specific homophilic binding. This diversity is 
essential for cell recognition events required for wiring the brain. Each 
isoform binds to itself but rarely to other isoforms. Specificity is determined 
by "matching" of three variable Ig domains within an approximately 220 kD 
ectodomain. Here, we present the structure of the homophilic binding region of 
Dscam, comprising the eight N-terminal Ig domains (Dscam(1-8)). Dscam(1-8) forms 
a symmetric homodimer of S-shaped molecules. This conformation, comprising two 
reverse turns, allows each pair of the three variable domains to "match" in an 
antiparallel fashion. Structural, genetic, and biochemical studies demonstrate 
that, in addition to variable domain "matching," intramolecular interactions 
between constant domains promote homophilic binding. These studies provide 
insight into how "matching" at all three pairs of variable domains in Dscam 
mediates isoform-specific recognition.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.07.042
PMCID: PMC2701508
PMID: 18805093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Molecular recognition regulates cellular interactions in many biological contexts. So that complex intercellular interactions can be carried out, a repertoire of recognition proteins has evolved through diversification of conserved domains. The prime example is the immunoglobulin (Ig) domain, which provides an evolutionarily conserved scaffold found in many recognition proteins (called Ig superfamily [IgSF] proteins). These proteins regulate diverse cellular processes, including morphogenesis, growth, differentiation, neuronal wiring, and the immune response. Molecular diversification within IgSFs, such as antibodies and T cell receptors, gives rise to vast repertoires of structurally related proteins that exhibit distinct recognition specificities. Recent studies have shown that molecular diversification of Dscam ( D own s yndrome c ell a dhesion m olecule) IgSF proteins in Drosophila is essential for wiring the fly brain ( Chen et al., 2006 ; Hattori et al., 2007 ). The molecular recognition provided by Dscam diversity plays a crucial role in regulating cellular interactions necessary for neural circuit assembly ( Hughes et al., 2007 ; Matthews et al., 2007 ; Soba et al., 2007 ; Wojtowicz et al., 2004 ; Zhan et al., 2004 ).

The key to Dscam function is the ability of isoforms to distinguish between each other with high fidelity. These isoforms share a common domain structure and contain variable amino acid sequences within three Ig domains ( Schmucker et al., 2000 )( Figure 1A ). The variable domains mediate isoform-specific homophilic binding of Dscam proteins ( Wojtowicz et al., 2004 ). Structural and biochemical studies have provided some clues to the molecular basis of this binding specificity. The three variable domains (i.e., Ig2, Ig3, and Ig7) engage in self-binding or “matching” in a modular fashion; Ig2 in one molecule matches Ig2 in an opposing molecule, Ig3 matches Ig3, and Ig7 matches Ig7 ( Wojtowicz et al., 2004 , 2007 ; Meijers et al., 2007 )( Figure 1B ). Only identical opposing domains (with rare exceptions) match each other. The self-binding properties of identical domains demonstrated that the Dscam gene potentially gives rise to 18,048 (i.e., 12 Ig2s × 47 Ig3s × 32 Ig7s) isoform-specific homophilic binding proteins ( Wojtowicz et al., 2007 ). And, because matching at all three variable domains is required for binding to occur between opposing molecules, binding is largely restricted to isoforms sharing identity at all three variable domains. Indeed, in all but a small fraction of cases, no binding above the threshold of the assay, rather than weaker binding, is observed between isoforms that differ at only one of the three variable domains, resulting in “all-or-none” binding.

Recent studies have demonstrated that each of the three variable domains engages in matching via a two-fold symmetric interface. A dimer present in the crystal structure of the first four Ig domains of Dscam demonstrated that the Ig2 and Ig3 interfaces comprise residues along one strand within the Ig domain ( Meijers et al., 2007 ), whereas biochemical and molecular modeling studies argued that the Ig7 interface is formed by multiple strands comprising one face of the Ig domain ( Wojtowicz et al., 2007 ). That these self-binding interface regions reside at the interface of many, if not all, variants of each domain and that these regions are sufficient to confer self-binding specificity was demonstrated through biochemical studies of many chimeric variable Ig domains ( Wojtowicz et al., 2007 ).

Despite these advances, the molecular basis of the curious “all-or-none” binding specificity of Dscam isoforms remained an enigma. For instance, why must all three pairs of variable domains match for binding to occur? And, furthermore, how is self-binding at each variable domain maintained in such a highly specific manner? Binding studies have revealed that a single interface residue difference between one pair of opposing variable domains is sufficient to prevent binding between isoforms even when they are identical at the other two variable domain pairs ( Wojtowicz et al., 2007 ). These binding properties present a remarkable example of binding specificity and raise the question of how such small differences at only one of three binding domains have such a dramatic effect on the overall binding of Dscam proteins. The crystal structure of the homophilic binding region of Dscam comprising the N-terminal eight Ig domains (Dscam 1−8 ) and additional modeling studies described herein illuminate the molecular basis of this “all-or-none” Dscam binding specificity.

DISCUSSION

The array of cell recognition proteins encoded by the Drosophila Dscam locus plays a crucial role in the formation of neuronal circuits. To function as unique identification tags in the developing nervous system, each of the possible 18,048 Dscam isoforms ( Wojtowicz et al., 2007 ) must recognize itself and exclude all other isoforms. The Dscam 1−8 structure provides insight into how this recognition is achieved.
