---
pmid: '14747467'
title: Cell cycle-dependent phosphorylation of the DNA polymerase epsilon subunit,
  Dpb2, by the Cdc28 cyclin-dependent protein kinase.
authors:
- Kesti T
- McDonald WH
- Yates JR 3rd
- Wittenberg C
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M313289200
---

# Cell cycle-dependent phosphorylation of the DNA polymerase epsilon subunit, Dpb2, by the Cdc28 cyclin-dependent protein kinase.
**Authors:** Kesti T, McDonald WH, Yates JR 3rd, Wittenberg C
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M313289200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M313289200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 2;279(14):14245-55. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M313289200. Epub
2004  Jan 26.

Cell cycle-dependent phosphorylation of the DNA polymerase epsilon subunit, 
Dpb2, by the Cdc28 cyclin-dependent protein kinase.

Kesti T(1), McDonald WH, Yates JR 3rd, Wittenberg C.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, The Scripps Research 
Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

DNA polymerase epsilon (Polepsilon), one of the three major eukaryotic 
replicative polymerases, is comprised of the essential catalytic subunit, called 
Pol2 in budding yeast, and three accessory subunits, only one of which, Dpb2, is 
essential. Polepsilon is recruited to replication origins during late G(1) phase 
prior to activation of replication. In this work we show that the budding yeast 
Dpb2 is phosphorylated in a cell cycle-dependent manner during late G(1) phase. 
Phosphorylation results in the appearance of a lower mobility species. The 
appearance of that species in vivo is dependent upon the Cdc28 cyclin-dependent 
protein kinase (CDK), which can directly phosphorylate Dpb2 in vitro. Either 
G(1) cyclin (Cln) or B-type cyclin (Clb)-associated CDK is sufficient for 
phosphorylation. Mapping of phosphorylation sites by mass spectrometry using a 
novel gel-based proteolysis protocol shows that, of the three consensus CDK 
phosphorylation sites, at least two, Ser-144 and Ser-616, are phosphorylated in 
vivo. The Cdc28 CDK phosphorylates only Ser-144 in vitro. Using site-directed 
mutagenesis, we show that Ser-144 is sufficient for the formation of the lower 
mobility form of Dpb2 in vivo. In contrast, Ser-616 appears not to be 
phosphorylated by Cdc28. Finally, inactivation of all three CDK consensus sites 
in Dpb2 results in a synthetic phenotype with the pol2-11 mutation, leading to 
decreased spore viability, slow growth, and increased thermosensitivity. We 
suggest that phosphorylation of Dpb2 during late G(1) phase at CDK consensus 
sites facilitates the interaction with Pol2 or the activity of Polepsilon

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M313289200
PMID: 14747467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
