---
pmid: '4860414'
title: Synergistic activation of beta-galactosidase by Na and Cs.
authors:
- Neville MC
- Ling GN
journal: Arch Biochem Biophys
year: '1967'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC3575911
doi: 10.1016/0003-9861(67)90395-5
---

# Synergistic activation of beta-galactosidase by Na and Cs.
**Authors:** Neville MC, Ling GN
**Journal:** Arch Biochem Biophys (1967)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0003-9861(67)90395-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/0003-9861(67)90395-5)
**PMC:** [PMC3575911](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3575911/)

## Abstract

1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1967 Mar 20;118(3):596-610. doi: 
10.1016/0003-9861(67)90395-5.

Synergistic activation of beta-galactosidase by Na and Cs.

Neville MC, Ling GN.

DOI: 10.1016/0003-9861(67)90395-5
PMID: 4860414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

This review provides an overview of the structure, function, and catalytic mechanism of lacZ β-galactosidase. The protein played a central role in Jacob and Monod's development of the operon model for the regulation of gene expression. Determination of the crystal structure made it possible to understand why deletion of certain residues toward the amino-terminus not only caused the full enzyme tetramer to dissociate into dimers but also abolished activity. It was also possible to rationalize α-complementation, in which addition to the inactive dimers of peptides containing the “missing” N-terminal residues restored catalytic activity. The enzyme is well known to signal its presence by hydrolyzing X-gal to produce a blue product. That this reaction takes place in crystals of the protein confirms that the X-ray structure represents an active conformation. Individual tetramers of β-galactosidase have been measured to catalyze 38,500 ± 900 reactions per minute. Extensive kinetic, biochemical, mutagenic, and crystallographic analyses have made it possible to develop a presumed mechanism of action. Substrate initially binds near the top of the active site but then moves deeper for reaction. The first catalytic step (called galactosylation) is a nucleophilic displacement by Glu537 to form a covalent bond with galactose. This is initiated by proton donation by Glu461. The second displacement (degalactosylation) by water or an acceptor is initiated by proton abstraction by Glu461. Both of these displacements occur via planar oxocarbenium ion-like transition states. The acceptor reaction with glucose is important for the formation of allolactose, the natural inducer of the lac operon.

Introduction

β-Galactosidase [3.2.1.23] ( Escherichia coli ) has a special place in both the history and the practice of molecular biology. It played a central role in Jacob and Monod's 1 development of the operon model for the regulation of gene expression. Also, its ability to signal its presence by producing an easily recognizable blue reaction product has made it a workhorse in cloning and other such molecular biology procedures.

The purpose of this review is to provide an overview of the biochemical and other properties of lacZ β-galactosidase in light of the three-dimensional structure.

β-Galactosidase has three enzymatic activities ( Fig. 1 ). 2 First, it can cleave the disaccharide lactose to form glucose and galactose, which can then enter glycolysis. Second, the enzyme can catalyze the transgalactosylation of lactose to allolactose, and, third, the allolactose can be cleaved to the monosaccharides. It is allolactose that binds to lacZ repressor and creates the positive feedback loop that regulates the amount of β-galactosidase in the cell.

In many respects, β-galactosidase is best recognized for its reaction with X-gal (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indoyl-β- d -galactopyranoside), a soluble colorless compound consisting of galactose linked to a substituted indole. β-Galactose has high specificity for the galactose part of its substrates but low specificity for the remainder. Thus, it hydrolyzes X-gal, releasing the substituted indole that spontaneously dimerizes to give an insoluble, intensely blue product. On growth medium containing X-gal, colonies of E. coli that have an active β-galactosidase become blue because of this reaction.

As shown in Figure 2 , the X-gal reaction can readily be performed in single crystals of the enzyme. β-Galactosidase, as proteins in general, forms crystals that include about 50% protein and 50% solvent by volume. The solvent-filled channels that extend throughout the crystal are much larger than the substrate and allow substrate to freely diffuse throughout the crystal. In early experiments on the nature of protein crystals, Wyckoff et al. 3 used a flow cell to investigate the diffusion of ligands into a 0.4 mm crystal of ribonuclease S. When the concentration of ammonium sulfate surrounding the crystal was rapidly changed, the half-time for re-equilibration within the crystal was 90 s. Matthews 4 used crystal density measurements to monitor the diffusion of ammonium sulfate solutions into crystals of γ-chymotrypsin and obtained very similar results. Based on these experiments, it can be estimated that a molecule the size of X-gal will diffuse through a 0.4 mm × 0.4 mm × 0.4 mm crystal of β-galactosidase in several minutes.

The blue color of a crystal of β-galactosidase exposed to X-gal ( Fig. 2 ) confirms that the enzyme in the crystal is catalytically competent. It also tends to suggest, but does not prove, that catalysis proceeds via relatively modest changes in the conformation of the enzyme, that is, there is no suggestion of major structural changes which might destroy the crystals.
