---
pmid: '14982987'
title: Toll-like receptor 3-mediated activation of NF-kappaB and IRF3 diverges at
  Toll-IL-1 receptor domain-containing adapter inducing IFN-beta.
authors:
- Jiang Z
- Mak TW
- Sen G
- Li X
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC373497
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0308496101
---

# Toll-like receptor 3-mediated activation of NF-kappaB and IRF3 diverges at Toll-IL-1 receptor domain-containing adapter inducing IFN-beta.
**Authors:** Jiang Z, Mak TW, Sen G, Li X
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0308496101](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0308496101)
**PMC:** [PMC373497](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC373497/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Mar 9;101(10):3533-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0308496101. Epub 2004 Feb 24.

Toll-like receptor 3-mediated activation of NF-kappaB and IRF3 diverges at 
Toll-IL-1 receptor domain-containing adapter inducing IFN-beta.

Jiang Z(1), Mak TW, Sen G, Li X.

Author information:
(1)University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 2M9.

We have previously shown that double-stranded RNA-triggered, Toll-like receptor 
3 (TLR3)-mediated signaling is independent of MyD88, IRAK4, and IRAK. Instead, 
TRAF6, TAK1, and TAB2 are recruited to TLR3 on poly(I.C) stimulation. 
TRAF6-TAK1-TAB2 are then translocated to the cytosol where TAK1 is 
phosphorylated and activated, leading to the activation of IkappaB kinase and 
NFkappaB. The present study addressed two important questions: (i) How are 
TRAF6, TAK1, and TAB2 recruited to TLR3? (ii) Are TRAF6, TAK1, and TAB2 also 
required for TLR3-mediated IRF3 activation? Recently, a novel Toll-IL-1 receptor 
(TIR)-containing adapter, TIR domain-containing adapter inducing IFN-beta 
(TRIF), was shown to play a critical role in TLR3-mediated activation of 
NF-kappaB and IRF3. We found that TLR3 recruits TRAF6 via adapter TRIF through a 
TRAF6-binding sequence in TRIF (PEEMSW, amino acids 250-255). Mutation of this 
TRAF6-binding sequence abolished the interaction of TRIF with TRAF6, but not 
with TLR3. Interestingly, mutation of the TRAF6-binding site of TRIF only 
abolished its ability to activate NF-kappaB but not IRF3, suggesting that 
TLR3-mediated activation of NF-kappaB and IRF3 might bifurcate at TRIF. In 
support of this finding, we showed that DN-TRAF6 and DN-TAK1 blocked 
poly(I.C)-induced NF-kappaB but not IRF3 activation. Furthermore, whereas 
poly(I.C)-induced NF-kappaB activation is completely abolished inTRAF6-/- MEFs, 
the signal-induced activation of IRF3 is TRAF6 independent. In conclusion, TRIF 
recruits TRAF6-TAK1-TAB2 to TLR3 through its TRAF6-binding site, which is 
required for NF-kappaB but not IRF3 activation. Therefore, double-stranded 
RNA-induced TLR3/TRIF-mediated NF-kappaB and IRF3 activation diverge at TRIF.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0308496101
PMCID: PMC373497
PMID: 14982987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

We have previously shown that double-stranded RNA-triggered, Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3)-mediated signaling is independent of MyD88, IRAK4, and IRAK. Instead, TRAF6, TAK1, and TAB2 are recruited to TLR3 on poly(I·C) stimulation. TRAF6-TAK1-TAB2 are then translocated to the cytosol where TAK1 is phosphorylated and activated, leading to the activation of IκB kinase and NFκB. The present study addressed two important questions: ( i ) How are TRAF6, TAK1, and TAB2 recruited to TLR3? ( ii ) Are TRAF6, TAK1, and TAB2 also required for TLR3-mediated IRF3 activation? Recently, a novel Toll-IL-1 receptor (TIR)-containing adapter, TIR domain-containing adapter inducing IFN-β (TRIF), was shown to play a critical role in TLR3-mediated activation of NF-κB and IRF3. We found that TLR3 recruits TRAF6 via adapter TRIF through a TRAF6-binding sequence in TRIF (PEEMSW, amino acids 250-255). Mutation of this TRAF6-binding sequence abolished the interaction of TRIF with TRAF6, but not with TLR3. Interestingly, mutation of the TRAF6-binding site of TRIF only abolished its ability to activate NF-κB but not IRF3, suggesting that TLR3-mediated activation of NF-κB and IRF3 might bifurcate at TRIF. In support of this finding, we showed that DN-TRAF6 and DN-TAK1 blocked poly(I·C)-induced NF-κB but not IRF3 activation. Furthermore, whereas poly(I·C)-induced NF-κB activation is completely abolished inTRAF6-/- MEFs, the signal-induced activation of IRF3 is TRAF6 independent. In conclusion, TRIF recruits TRAF6-TAK1-TAB2 to TLR3 through its TRAF6-binding site, which is required for NF-κB but not IRF3 activation. Therefore, double-stranded RNA-induced TLR3/TRIF-mediated NF-κB and IRF3 activation diverge at TRIF.

Materials and Methods

Biological Reagents and Cell Culture. Recombinant human IL-1β was provided by the National Cancer Institute. Poly(I·C) was purchased from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech. Anti-flag (M2) was from Sigma. Anti-HA was from Upstate (Charlottesville, VA). HeLa cells, TRAF6+/- and TRAF6-/- MEFs were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS, penicillin G (100 μg/ml), and streptomycin (100 μg/ml). 293-TK/Zeo cells, I1A and I3A ( 38 ), were maintained in regular DMEM plus 0.4 mg/ml of the neomycin analog G418. 293-TK/Zeo cells stably expressing Flag-TLR3 were maintained in the same media plus hygromycin (0.25 mg/ml).

Recombinant Plasmids. TRIF was amplified by RT-PCR from 293 cells and cloned into pcDNA3.1 (His-TRIF and HA-TRIF). The TRIF mutants including (1) E88A, (2) E252A, (3) E303A, (4) E493A, and (5) E266A and the mutants with combined mutations were generated by the QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis kits with pfu-ultra as the polymerase (Stratagene) and pcDNA3.1-V5-His-TRIF as the template. Mutations were confirmed by sequencing. Expression constructs for Flag-tagged TRAF1, TRAF2, TRAF3, TRAF5, TRAF6, MyD88, and DN-TRAF6 were kindly provided by Holger Wesche (Tularik, South San Francisco, CA). pE-selectin-luc, an NF-κB-dependent E-selectin-luc reporter plasmid, was described by Schindler and Baichwal ( 39 ). P561-luc is an IRF3-dependent luciferase construct ( 40 ). Dominant-negative TAK1 (TAK1-DN-K66W) was a kind gift from Kunihiro Matsumoto (Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan).

Coimmunoprecipitation and Immunoblotting. Cells untreated or treated with poly(I·C) (100 μg/ml) were lysed in a Triton-containing lysis buffer (0.5% Triton X-100/20 mM Hepes, pH 7.4/150 mM NaCl/12.5 mM β-glycerophosphate/1.5 mM MgCl 2 /10 mM NaF/2 mM DTT/1 mM sodium orthovanadate/2 mM EGTA/20 μM aprotinin/1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride). Cell extracts were incubated with 1 μg of antibody or preimmune serum (negative control) for 2 h, followed by a 2-h incubation with 20 μl of protein G-Sepharose beads (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech; prewashed and resuspended in PBS at a 1:1 ratio). After incubation, the beads were washed four times with lysis buffer, separated by SDS/PAGE, transferred to Immobilon-P membranes (Millipore), and analyzed by immunoblotting.

Luciferase Reporter Assays. Cells (2 × 10 5 ) were transfected by using Lipofectamine-2000 according to the manufacturer's instructions with 200 ng of pE-selectin-luc (for NF-κB activation) or 50 ng of 561-luc (for IRF3 activation), 200 ng of pSV 2 -β-gal, and indicated amounts of expression constructs. After 24 h, the cells were left untreated or stimulated with poly(I·C) for 6 h before harvest. Luciferase and β-galactosidase activities were determined by using the luciferase assay system and chemiluminescent reagents from Promega.

Results

TRIF-Mediated Activation of NF-κB and IRF3 are IRAK- and MyD88-Independent. Through chemical mutagenesis, we previously generated several IL-1-unresponsive cell lines (derived from parental 293 cells) lacking specific components of the pathway. Mutant cell line I1A lacks both IRAK protein and mRNA ( 38 , 40 ), whereas I3A cells lack MyD88 (Z.J. and X.L., unpublished data). Neither NF-κB nor JNK is activated in IL-1-treated I1A and I3A cells, but these responses are restored in I1A-IRAK and I3A-MyD88 cells, indicating that IRAK and MyD88 are required for both ( 40 ). Interestingly, poly(I·C)-induced, TLR3-mediated NF-κB and MAP kinase activation are intact in I1A and I3A mutant cells, indicating that IRAK and MyD88 are not required for TLR3-mediated signaling ( 42 ). Adapter molecule TRIF is required for TLR3-mediated signaling ( 36 , 37 ). We recently examined TRIF-mediated NF-κB and IRF3 activation in I1A and I3A mutant cells, as compared to WT 293 cells. Consistent with its role as an adapter for TLR3, TRIF-induced NF-κB ( Fig. 1 A ) and IRF3 ( Fig. 1 B ) activation are also IRAK- and MyD88-independent. The luciferase reporter constructs driven by NF-κB-dependent E-selectin promoter ( 27 ) and IRF3-dependent 561 promoter ( 43 ) were used, respectively. As a control, it was shown that MyD88-induced NF-κB activation is IRAK-dependent, whereas MyD88 is incapable of activating IRF3 ( Fig. 1 C and data not shown).

TRIF Specifically Interacts with TRAF6 Through Its TRAF6-Binding Site. We previously showed that TRAF6-TAK1-TAB2 are recruited to TLR3 on poly(I·C) stimulation ( 42 ). We hypothesized that TRIF, an adapter for TLR3 plays an important role in recruitment of these signaling components to the receptor. Through coimmunoprecipitation experiments, we found that TRIF specifically interacts with TRAF6 but not with the other TRAF molecules when they are coexpressed in 293 cells ( Fig. 2 B ). Protein sequence analysis of TRIF revealed three typical TRAF6-binding sequences [Px E xxD/W/E/F/Y ( 41 ), including 1, PEEPPD (amino acids 86-91), 2, PEEMSW (amino acids 250-255), and 3, PVECTE (amino acids 301-306)] ( Fig. 2 A ). TRIF also contains two nontypical TRAF6-binding sequences, numbered as 4, PLESSP (amino acids 491-496), and 5, PPELPS (amino acids 264-269) ( Fig. 2 A ). To determine which TRAF6-binding site is responsible for the interaction of TRIF with TRAF6, we mutated the conserved Glutamic acid (E) to Alanine (A) in the putative TRAF6-binding sites (E88A, E252A, E303A, E493A, and E266A). The TRIF mutants were then transfected into 293 cells and examined for their ability to interact with TRAF6. Mutation on site 2 (E252A), but not other putative TRAF6-binding sequences, greatly reduced the ability of TRIF to interact with TRAF6 ( Fig. 2 B and data not shown). However, the same mutation did not affect the TLR3-TRIF interaction ( Fig. 2 C ). On the other hand, the mutation on site 4 in the TIR domain of TRIF abolished the interaction of TRIF with TLR3, probably because of the disruption to the TIR domain ( Fig. 2 C )

The TRIF-TRAF6 Interaction Is Important for NF-κB but Not IRF3 Activation. We then examined the TRIF mutants for their ability to activate NF-κB and IRF3 by luciferase reporter assay. As shown in Fig. 3 B , site 2 (E252A) mutation completely abolished TRIF-induced NF-κB activation. Either individual or combined mutations on this site (E252A) showed complete loss of NF-κB activation. Importantly, the same mutation does not affect IRF3 activation ( Fig. 3 C ). Because the mutation on site 2 abolished the TRIF-TRAF6 interaction ( Fig. 2 ), the above result also implies that the recruitment of TRAF6 to TRIF is probably only important for TRIF to activate NF-κB but not IRF3. On the other hand, the site 4 (E493A) mutation that abolished the TRIF-TLR3 interaction failed to activate NF-κB and IRF3 ( Fig. 3 B and C ).

These TRIF mutants were examined for their ability to activate the IFNβ promoter, which depends on the activation of both NF-κB and IRF3 ( 13 , 33 ). Mutation on site 2 (E252A) only partially abolished the ability of TRIF to activate the IFNβ promoter, probably because of the fact that E253A can still activate IRF3 ( Fig. 3 C and D ). Mutant 4 (E493A) completely failed to activate IFNβ promoter driven luciferase activity, consistent with its inability to activate NF-κB and IRF3 ( Fig. 3 D ).

We then examined whether any of these TRIF mutants can function as dominant-negative mutants for TLR3-mediated NF-κB and IRF3 activation ( Fig. 4 ). Interestingly, we found that mutant E252A efficiently inhibited poly(I·C)-induced NF-κB activation in HeLa cells, whereas it had significantly less effect on IRF3 activation in the same cells, confirming that this TRAF6-binding site (site 2) is more critical for TLR3-mediated NF-κB activation than IRF3 activation. The reduction in the fold of induction of poly(I·C)-induced IRF3 activation in HeLa cells transfected with E252A is due to the constitutive IRF3 activation by overexpression of E252A. As a control, mutant E493A did not have any inhibitory role in poly(I·C)-induced TLR3-mediated NF-κB and IRF3 activation.

TLR3-Mediated NF-κB and IRF3 Activation Diverges at TRIF. Mutation in the TRAF6-binding site of TRIF (E252A) abolished its ability to activate NF-κB but had no effect on its constitutive activation of IRF3. Furthermore, this E252A mutant efficiently inhibited poly(I·C)-induced NF-κB activation but had much less effect on signal-induced IRF3 activation. Taken together, these results suggest that the TRIF-mediated recruitment of TRAF6 is probably only required for NF-κB but not IRF3 activation, implying that TLR3-mediated NF-κB and IRF3 activation probably bifurcate at TRIF. If that is the case, TRAF6 and TAK1 should only be required for NF-κB but not IRF3 activation. To test this, dominant-negative mutants of TAK1 (DN-TAK1) and TRAF6 (DN-TRAF6) were used to inhibit TRIF-induced signaling. As shown in Fig. 5 A , both TAK1 (DN-TAK1, kinase inactive mutant) and TRAF6 (DN-TRAF6) can specifically inhibit TRIF-mediated NF-κB but not IRF3 activation. Furthermore, TAK1 (DN-TAK1, kinase inactive mutant) and TRAF6 (DN-TRAF6) efficiently inhibited poly(I·C)-induced NF-κB but not IRF3 activation in HeLa cells, indicating that these two components are only involved in TLR3-mediated NF-κB but not IRF3 activation ( Fig. 5 B ). This conclusion is supported by the following experiment in TR AF6-/- MEFs. Transfection of TLR3 rendered TRAF6+/- MEFs (TLR3-TRAF6+/- MEFs) responsiveness to poly(I·C) stimulation. Although poly(I·C) induced activation of both NF-κB and IRF3 in TLR3-TRAF6+/- MEFs, it only activated IRF3 in TLR3-TRAF6-/- MEFs, indicating that TRAF6 is required for TLR3-mediated NF-κB but not IRF3 activation ( Fig. 5 C ).

Discussion

Based on the data presented in this article and in published studies ( 34 - 37 , 42 ), we propose a model for TLR3-mediated signaling ( Fig. 6 ). On poly(I·C) stimulation, adapter molecule TRIF is recruited to TLR3 through their TIR-TIR domain interaction. TRIF then recruits TRAF6 to TLR3 through its TRAF6-binding site, followed by recruitment of TAK1 and TAB2 via their interaction with TRAF6. TRAF6-TAK1-TAB2 are then dissociated from the receptor and translocated to the cytosol, where TAK1 is activated. The activated TAK1 leads to the activation of IKK and NF-κB. Independent of TRAF6-TAK1-TAB2, through interaction with unknown intermediate signaling components, TRIF leads to the activation of TBK1/IKKε, resulting in IRF3 activation.

Sarkar et al. ( 43 ) recently reported that TRIF has distinct binding sites for TRAF6 and TBK1, consistent with our hypothesis that TRIF is the divergent point in TLR3-mediated NF-κB and IRF3 activation. However, in the same manuscript, they also showed that a C-terminal deletion of TRIF led to further reduction in NF-κB activity, and concluded that TRIF can activate NF-κB through both TRAF6-dependent and -independent mechanisms. In our study, we found that the E252A mutation alone can completely abolish NF-κB activity, indicating that TRIF-mediated NF-κB activation is solely TRAF6-dependent. Our conclusion is strongly supported by the fact that TLR3-mediated NF-κB activation is completely abolished in TRAF6-/- MEFs.

TRIF-deficient mice were defective in both TLR3- and TLR4-mediated expression of IFN-β and activation of IRF3 ( 36 , 37 ). Whereas TRIF-deficient mice showed complete loss of TLR3-induced NF-κB activation, TLR4-mediated NF-κB activation was only completely abolished in mice deficient in both MyD88 and TRIF ( 36 , 37 ). The fact that both poly(I·C)-induced NF-κB and IRF3 activation are completely abolished in TRIF-deficient mice suggests that TLR3 probably only mediates TRIF-dependent pathways ( 36 , 37 ). In support of this conclusion, we have previously shown that IL-1 receptor proximal signaling components (including MyD88, IRAK4, and IRAK) are not involved in TLR3-mediated signaling pathway (ref. 42 ; Z.J. and X.L., unpublished data). Therefore, unlike the IL-1R and other TLRs (including TLR4) that they all use the common MyD88-dependent pathway, TLR3 seems to only employ MyD88-independent TRIF-dependent pathways. One possible explanation is that the conserved proline residue within the cytoplasmic domain of the murine and human TLR proteins that is mutated in LPS-hyporesponsive C3H/HeJ mice (P712H) is represented by an alanine residue in TLR3.

Our previous studies implicated the role of TRAF6, TAK1, and TAB2 in TLR3-mediated signaling, showing that these signaling components are recruited to TLR3 on poly(I·C) stimulation. In this paper, we have provided a mechanism for how TRIF may help to link TRAF6, TAK1, and TAB2 to TLR3. Furthermore, our results suggest that TRIF-mediated recruitment of TRAF6 to TLR3 and the subsequent activation of TAK1 are probably only required for TLR3-induced NF-κB but not IRF3 activation. Therefore, despite the differences in the receptor proximal signaling events, TLR3 shares similar downstream signaling components with the IL-1R-mediated pathway to activate NF-κB, including TRAF6, TAK1, TAB2, and IKK ( Fig. 6 ). Whereas we showed that TRIF recruits TRAF6 to TLR3 through a TRAF6-binding site, it is likely that TAK1 and TAB2 are recruited to TLR3 through TRAF6, probably similar to how TAK1 and TAB2 interact with TRAF6 in the IL-1 pathway ( 27 ). Future studies are required to understand how TRAF6, TAK1, and TAB2 are dissociated from TLR3 and how TAK1 is activated in the cytosol. Although it is possible that TRIF directly interacts with TBK1/IKKε to activate IRF3, TRIF may recruit additional intermediate components to TLR3. Future research should focus on the identification of novel signaling molecules that participate in TLR3-TRIF-mediated IRF3 activation.
