---
pmid: '22193777'
title: ChAM, a novel motif that mediates PALB2 intrinsic chromatin binding and facilitates
  DNA repair.
authors:
- Bleuyard JY
- Buisson R
- Masson JY
- Esashi F
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC3271335
doi: 10.1038/embor.2011.243
---

# ChAM, a novel motif that mediates PALB2 intrinsic chromatin binding and facilitates DNA repair.
**Authors:** Bleuyard JY, Buisson R, Masson JY, Esashi F
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/embor.2011.243](https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2011.243)
**PMC:** [PMC3271335](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3271335/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2012 Feb 1;13(2):135-41. doi: 10.1038/embor.2011.243.

ChAM, a novel motif that mediates PALB2 intrinsic chromatin binding and 
facilitates DNA repair.

Bleuyard JY(1), Buisson R, Masson JY, Esashi F.

Author information:
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, 
Oxford OX1 3RE, UK.

The partner and localizer of breast cancer 2 susceptibility protein (PALB2) is 
crucial for the repair of DNA damage by homologous recombination. Here, we 
report that chromatin-association motif (ChAM), an evolutionarily conserved 
motif in PALB2, is necessary and sufficient to mediate its chromatin association 
in both unperturbed and damaged cells. ChAM is distinct from the previously 
described PALB2 DNA-binding regions. Deletion of ChAM decreases PALB2 and Rad51 
accumulation at DNA damage sites and confers cellular hypersensitivity to the 
genotoxic drug mitomycin C. These results suggest that PALB2 chromatin 
association via ChAM facilitates PALB2 function in the cellular resistance to 
DNA damage.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2011.243
PMCID: PMC3271335
PMID: 22193777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

The partner and localizer of breast cancer 2 susceptibility protein (PALB2) is crucial for the repair of DNA damage by homologous recombination. Here, we report that chromatin-association motif (ChAM), an evolutionarily conserved motif in PALB2, is necessary and sufficient to mediate its chromatin association in both unperturbed and damaged cells. ChAM is distinct from the previously described PALB2 DNA-binding regions. Deletion of ChAM decreases PALB2 and Rad51 accumulation at DNA damage sites and confers cellular hypersensitivity to the genotoxic drug mitomycin C. These results suggest that PALB2 chromatin association via ChAM facilitates PALB2 function in the cellular resistance to DNA damage.

Introduction

DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are the most deleterious lesions a cell can encounter ( Jackson & Bartek, 2009 ; Hiom, 2010 ), and can arise either from exposure to genotoxic agents (for example, ionizing radiation, anticancer drugs) or as the consequence of normal cellular processes (for example, DNA replication, aerobic metabolism). The partner and localizer of breast cancer 2 susceptibility protein, PALB2, has recently emerged as a crucial factor in homologous recombination (HR), which repairs DSBs using the replicated sister chromatid as a template and thus contributes to the maintenance of genome stability ( Xia et al, 2006 ; Tischkowitz & Xia, 2010 ). Inherited heterozygous mutations in the PALB2 gene are associated with familial breast or pancreatic cancer predisposition ( Erkko et al, 2007 ; Rahman et al, 2007 ; Slater et al, 2010 ; Tischkowitz & Xia, 2010 ), while homozygous mutations cause the subtype N of the genetic disorder Fanconi anaemia ( Reid et al, 2007 ; Xia et al, 2007 ).

PALB2 is the centrepiece of a DNA repair complex, designated the BRCA complex, including the breast cancer 1 (BRCA1) and 2 (BRCA2) susceptibility proteins, the Rad51 recombinase, which catalyses strand invasion and transfer phases of HR, and the chromodomain protein MRG15 ( Xia et al, 2006 ; Sy et al, 2009a , 2009b ; Zhang et al, 2009a , 2009b ; Buisson et al, 2010 ; Dray et al, 2010 ; Hayakawa et al, 2010 ). Multiple protein interactions including PALB2 oligomerization, BRCA1 binding and MRG15 binding are proposed to help PALB2 recruitment to DSB sites, which in turn promotes the accumulation of BRCA2 and Rad51 and hence stimulates homologous recombinational repair (HRR) ( Xia et al, 2006 ; Zhang et al, 2009a , 2009b ; Sy et al, 2009b , 2009c ; Hayakawa et al, 2010 ). Furthermore, recent biochemical studies showed that purified PALB2 directly binds DNA via two separate regions (here called P2T1 and P2T3; Fig 1A ) and can stimulate Rad51-mediated strand invasion ( Buisson et al, 2010 ; Dray et al, 2010 ).

Here, we identify a novel evolutionarily conserved PALB2 motif, named chromatin-association motif (ChAM), comprising 52 amino acids in the N-terminal part of the DNA-binding region P2T3. A PALB2 mutant harbouring a ChAM deletion (PALB2 ΔChAM ) interacts with other known binding partners, but exhibits reduced association with chromatin in unperturbed and damaged cells. ChAM deletion is sufficient to decrease PALB2 and Rad51 accumulation at DSB sites and to render human cells hypersensitive to the DNA-damaging drug mitomycin C (MMC). Most importantly, although ChAM deletion does not affect PALB2 DNA-binding properties, ChAM on its own associates with nucleosomes. Together, these observations support a model in which ChAM-mediated chromatin association of PALB2 facilitates the recruitment of repair-proficient BRCA complexes at DSB sites and thus the promotion of Rad51-mediated HRR.

Discussion

In this study, we have identified and characterized ChAM, an evolutionarily conserved motif of PALB2. We show that deletion of the 52-residue ChAM was sufficient to decrease the constitutive chromatin association of PALB2 and, most remarkably, that ChAM is a new functional domain mediating nucleosome association of PALB2. The importance of ChAM for normal PALB2 function is highlighted in cells expressing PALB2 ΔChAM , which display a moderate but significant reduction in PALB2 and Rad51 recruitment to DSB sites, and severe MMC sensitivity. These data support the model presented in Fig 5 . In unperturbed cells, ChAM, together with MRG15, maintains a fraction of BRCA pre-complex including MRG15, PALB2, BRCA2 and Rad51 on chromatin. Upon DSB formation and DDR activation, this BRCA pre-complex assists efficient reassembly of the BRCA complex and/or further accumulation of BRCA complexes at DSB sites. Although damaged-induced accumulation primarily requires BRCA1, the ChAM-dependent nucleosome binding may help the quality control of HRR, which is catalysed by PALB2, BRCA2 and Rad51.

Deletion of ChAM severely impaired but did not completely abrogate the chromatin association of PALB2, as assessed by cellular fractionation. One of the factors that appear to account for ChAM-independent chromatin association of PALB2 is MRG15, overexpression of which partially restored chromatin association of PALB2 ΔChAM . Meanwhile, other factors may also influence PALB2 association with chromatin in vivo ; first, although BRCA1 is particularly important for PALB2 accumulation at damage sites, which is mediated through the binding of BRCA1 and its accessory proteins to modified chromatin at DSBs ( Bekker-Jensen & Mailand, 2010 ), BRCA1 also associates with undamaged chromatin ( Fig 2A ), and thus may help the constitutive recruitment of PALB2 to chromatin. Second, PALB2 contains two separate DNA-binding regions ( Fig 1A ), and although these regions preferentially bind HR-intermediate DNA structures, these DNA-binding properties may also support the residual chromatin association of PALB2 ΔChAM . Importantly, PALB2 chromatin association appears to affect the regulation of HRR proteins BRCA2 and Rad51; PALB2 defects or overexpression result in opposed effects on BRCA2 and Rad51 chromatin association ( Fig 2 ; supplementary Fig S2 online), demonstrating a tight correlation between the levels of PALB2, BRCA2 and Rad51 loaded onto chromatin. Further, our analyses of cells expressing PALB2 WT or PALB2 ΔChAM establish a correlation between constitutive PALB2 chromatin association and the ability to form Rad51 DNA damage-induced foci. We propose that the regulation of PALB2 chromatin association offers an additional quality control mechanism during HR-mediated DSB repair, and that deregulation of PALB2 chromatin association may contribute to HRR defects, including hyper-recombination phenotypes.

The newly characterized ChAM properties, which mediate chromatin association, provide exciting new perspectives on its role during DNA repair. Even though direct DNA or core histone binding was not detectable, we found that ChAM robustly binds to nucleosomes ( Fig 3 ). Although we cannot exclude the possibility that ChAM binding to nucleosomes is mediated by other nucleosome-binding proteins such as chromatin remodelling complexes ( Glatt et al, 2011 ), it is tempting to speculate that PALB2 provides an optimum environment to the chromatin and/or the BRCA complex around DSB sites during HRR. This hypothesis may explain the differences we observed in cell survival, whereby expression of PALB2 ΔChAM in PALB2-defective cells failed to rescue MMC hypersensitivity, but partly restored resistance to olaparib treatment. It is noteworthy that although both MMC and olaparib treatments produce DSBs after replication fork collapse, these are generated through different mechanisms; olaparib treatment generates DSBs when replication forks encounter unrepaired single-strand breaks, whereas MMC-induced DSBs are generated as intermediate products resulting from the repair of interstrand cross-links. Hence, it is possible that an intricate repair process involving additional interstrand cross-links repair factors upon MMC treatment is more dependent on ChAM to retain PALB2 at DSB sites and to assist positioning of the BRCA complex during HRR.

In summary, our study shows for the first time that PALB2 contains a dedicated chromatin association motif, distinct from previously reported DNA-binding regions. Given the evolutionary conservation of ChAM, which is important for survival after DNA damage, this report sheds new light on the functions of PALB2. Further work, along with studies of its binding partners BRCA1, MRG15 and BRCA2, will be required to gain a full appreciation of the role of PALB2 chromatin association properties in DNA damage repair processes.

Methods

Cells were grown under standard conditions. DNA-binding assay was carried out as described by Buisson et al (2010) . Cellular fractionation, immunoprecipitation, indirect immunofluorescence and cell survival analyses were performed using standard techniques.

Detailed methods are available in the supplementary information online.

Supplementary information is available at EMBO reports online ( http://www.emboreports.org ).
