---
pmid: '38970357'
title: Zebrafish trpm7 mutants show reduced motility in free movement.
authors:
- Watai K
- Sadamitsu K
- Wada S
- Kashima M
- Hirata H
journal: Dev Growth Differ
year: '2024'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/dgd.12937
---

# Zebrafish trpm7 mutants show reduced motility in free movement.
**Authors:** Watai K, Sadamitsu K, Wada S, Kashima M, Hirata H
**Journal:** Dev Growth Differ (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dgd.12937](https://doi.org/10.1111/dgd.12937)

## Abstract

1. Dev Growth Differ. 2024 Aug;66(6):349-356. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12937. Epub 2024
Jul  6.

Zebrafish trpm7 mutants show reduced motility in free movement.

Watai K(1), Sadamitsu K(1), Wada S(1), Kashima M(2), Hirata H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biological Science, College of Science and 
Engineering, Aoyama Gakuin University, Sagamihara, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Science, Toho University, Funabashi, Japan.

Parkinson's disease is a neurological disorder characterized by reduced 
motility, depression and dementia. Guamanian parkinsonism dementia with 
amyotrophic sclerosis is a local case of Parkinson's disease reported in the 
Western Pacific Islands of Guam and Rota as well as in the Kii Peninsula of 
Japan. A previous genetic study has suggested that Guamanian parkinsonism is 
attributable to a variant of the TRPM7 gene, which encodes for 
melastatin-related transient receptor potential (TRP) ion channels. But the link 
between parkinsonism and the TRPM7 gene remains elusive. Previous studies have 
addressed that trpm7-deficient zebrafish embryos showed defects in pigmentation 
and touch-evoked motor response. In this study, we identified a new viable 
allele of trpm7 mutant causing an I756N amino acid substitution in the first 
transmembrane domain. Behavioral analyses revealed that trpm7 mutants showed 
compromised motility with their movement distance shorter than wild-type larvae. 
The velocity of the movement was significantly reduced in trpm7 mutants than in 
wild-type larvae. Along with a previous finding of reduced dopaminergic neurons 
in zebrafish trpm7 mutants, reduced motility of trpm7 mutants can suggest 
another similarity between trpm7 phenotypes and Parkinson's disease symptoms.

© 2024 Japanese Society of Developmental Biologists.

DOI: 10.1111/dgd.12937
PMID: 38970357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
