---
pmid: '25953817'
title: 2.2 Å resolution cryo-EM structure of β-galactosidase in complex with a cell-permeant
  inhibitor.
authors:
- Bartesaghi A
- Merk A
- Banerjee S
- Matthies D
- Wu X
- Milne JL
- Subramaniam S
journal: Science
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC6512338
doi: 10.1126/science.aab1576
---

# 2.2 Å resolution cryo-EM structure of β-galactosidase in complex with a cell-permeant inhibitor.
**Authors:** Bartesaghi A, Merk A, Banerjee S, Matthies D, Wu X, Milne JL, Subramaniam S
**Journal:** Science (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.aab1576](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aab1576)
**PMC:** [PMC6512338](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6512338/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2015 Jun 5;348(6239):1147-51. doi: 10.1126/science.aab1576. Epub 2015
 May 7.

2.2 Å resolution cryo-EM structure of β-galactosidase in complex with a 
cell-permeant inhibitor.

Bartesaghi A(1), Merk A(1), Banerjee S(1), Matthies D(1), Wu X(2), Milne JL(1), 
Subramaniam S(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Computational Biology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. ss1@nih.gov.

Cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) is rapidly emerging as a powerful tool for 
protein structure determination at high resolution. Here we report the structure 
of a complex between Escherichia coli β-galactosidase and the cell-permeant 
inhibitor phenylethyl β-D-thiogalactopyranoside (PETG), determined by cryo-EM at 
an average resolution of ~2.2 angstroms (Å). Besides the PETG ligand, we 
identified densities in the map for ~800 water molecules and for magnesium and 
sodium ions. Although it is likely that continued advances in detector 
technology may further enhance resolution, our findings demonstrate that 
preparation of specimens of adequate quality and intrinsic protein flexibility, 
rather than imaging or image-processing technologies, now represent the major 
bottlenecks to routinely achieving resolutions close to 2 Å using 
single-particle cryo-EM.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/science.aab1576
PMCID: PMC6512338
PMID: 25953817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Preparing to download ... HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
