---
pmid: '12813461'
title: Activation of beta-catenin in prostate epithelium induces hyperplasias and
  squamous transdifferentiation.
authors:
- Bierie B
- Nozawa M
- Renou JP
- Shillingford JM
- Morgan F
- Oka T
- Taketo MM
- Cardiff RD
- Miyoshi K
- Wagner KU
- Robinson GW
- Hennighausen L
journal: Oncogene
year: '2003'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC11799897
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1206426
---

# Activation of beta-catenin in prostate epithelium induces hyperplasias and squamous transdifferentiation.
**Authors:** Bierie B, Nozawa M, Renou JP, Shillingford JM, Morgan F, Oka T, Taketo MM, Cardiff RD, Miyoshi K, Wagner KU, Robinson GW, Hennighausen L
**Journal:** Oncogene (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1206426](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1206426)
**PMC:** [PMC11799897](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11799897/)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2003 Jun 19;22(25):3875-87. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1206426.

Activation of beta-catenin in prostate epithelium induces hyperplasias and 
squamous transdifferentiation.

Bierie B(1), Nozawa M, Renou JP, Shillingford JM, Morgan F, Oka T, Taketo MM, 
Cardiff RD, Miyoshi K, Wagner KU, Robinson GW, Hennighausen L.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA.

The Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway is critical for normal mammalian 
development, the specification of epidermal cells and neoplastic transformation 
of intestinal epithelium. However, precise molecular information regarding 
cell-specific responses to beta-catenin signaling has been limited. This 
question was addressed using a mouse model in which exon 3 of the beta-catenin 
gene was deleted in several cell types with loxP-mediated recombination 
utilizing a Cre transgene under control of the mouse mammary tumor virus-long 
terminal repeat (MMTV-LTR). The stabilization of beta-catenin in prostate 
epithelium resulted in hyperplasias and extensive transdifferentiation into 
epidermal-like structures, which expressed keratins 1 and 6, filaggrin, loricrin 
and involucrin. The cell-specific loss of NKCC1 protein and reduced nuclear 
Stat5a is further suggestive of a loss of prostate epithelial characteristics. 
In addition to the prostate, hyperplasias and squamous metaplasias were detected 
in epithelia of the epididymis, vas deferens, coagulating gland, preputial gland 
and salivary gland. However, and in contrast to a recent study, no lesions 
reminiscent of high-grade prostate intraepithelial neoplasia were detected. 
Since beta-catenin was activated in several cell types and impinged upon the 
viability of these mice, it was not possible to evaluate the cumulative effect 
over more than 3 months. To assess long-term consequences of beta-catenin 
activation, mutant and control prostate tissues were transplanted into the 
mammary fat pads of wild-type males. Notably, squamous metaplasias, 
intra-acinous hyperplasia and possible neoplastic transformation were observed 
after a total of 18 weeks of beta-catenin stimulation. This suggests that the 
transdifferentiation into squamous metaplasias is an early response of 
endoderm-derived cells to beta-catenin, and that the development of 
intra-acinous hyperplasias or neoplastic foci is a later event.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1206426
PMID: 12813461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Prostate cancer (PCa) is a significant health concern for men worldwide
and is particularly prevalent in the United States. It is a complex disease
presenting different molecular subtypes and varying degrees of aggressiveness.
Transgenic/genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs) greatly enhanced our
understanding of the intricate molecular processes that underlie PCa progression
and advancement and have offered valuable insights into potential therapeutic
targets for this disease. The integration of whole-exome and whole-genome
sequencing, along with expression profiling, has played a pivotal role in
advancing GEMMs by facilitating the identification of genetic alterations
driving PCa development. This review focuses on genetically modified mice
classified into the first and second generations of PCa models. We summarize
whether models created by manipulating the function of specific genes replicate
the consequences of genomic alterations observed in human PCa, including early
and later disease stages. We discuss cases where GEMMs did not fully exhibit the
expected human PCa phenotypes and possible causes of the failure. Here, we
summarize the comprehensive understanding, recent advances, and the strengths
and limitations of the GEMMs in advancing our insights into PCa, offering
genetic and molecular perspectives for developing novel GEMM models.

1. Introduction

Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most frequently diagnosed non-cutaneous
cancer and the fifth leading cause of cancer-related death in men globally. In the
United States, it is a prevalent form of cancer in men, accounting for approximately
14% of all new cancer cases [ 1 ][ 2 ]. Radical prostatectomy remains a gold standard for
treating localized PCa, and androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is the backbone of
systemic therapy for those who experience disease relapse after local therapy or for
those with metastatic disease [ 3 ][ 4 ][ 5 ].
Poor prognoses persist in patients with advanced disease, attributed to factors like
age, race, oxidative stress, inflammation, disease heterogeneity, drug resistance,
and distant metastases [ 6 ][ 7 ]. As a result, the five-year disease-specific survival
rate for metastatic disease stands at approximately 32.3% [ 1 ].

Creating genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs) is crucial for studying
diseases like cancers, allowing researchers to mimic human pathology [ 8 ][ 9 ]. During the
1980s, independent researchers unknowingly developed the first transgenic mice
expressing dominant oncogenes (oncomice), highlighting concurrent progress in
genetic engineering [ 10 ]. A breakthrough in
this area was the creation of tissue-specific promoters and “Cre-lox”
technology [ 11 ][ 12 ]. In cancer biology, there are three major types of
genetic modification: "knock-in", involving the insertion of a
transgene or modified allele; the “knock-out”, which entails the
targeted inactivation of a specific gene or DNA segment to assess its function; and
the “conditional and/or inducible knock-out”, which allows for
spatially or temporally specific knockout [ 13 ]. Several strategies are utilized to integrate a transgene into the mouse
genome to generate transgenic and gene knockout/knockin mouse models [ 14 ][ 15 ].
Major approach to introduce germline genetic modifications in a mouse include zygote
route using pronuclear microinjection, and embryonic stem (ES) cell mediated gene
-targeted transgene approach [ 16 ]. In the
standard transgenic approach, the target transgene is injected directly into the
pronucleus of murine embryos at the pronuclear stage [ 17 ][ 18 ]. The
modified embryos are then transferred to surrogate mothers for gestation and
development. Integration of the transgene into the genome typically occurs randomly.
In recent years, exciting advancements in technology have been applied to the zygote
route include the use of Sleeping Beauty transposons, ensuring
reliable germline transgenesis[ 19 ]. On the
other hand, in the gene-targeted transgenic approach, the transgene is introduced
into ES cells [ 13 ][ 16 ]. The modified ES cells are then injected into
blastocysts, which are subsequently implanted into surrogate mothers. This method
allows for more precise targeting of the transgene to specific genomic loci. In
addition to these, several other methods have been utilized in genetic research such
as somatic cell nuclear transfer, retroviral -mediated transgenesis, homologous
recombination in ES cells, sperm- and testicular-mediated gene transfer, Cre-lox
mediated gene targeting, RNAi-mediated gene targeting, and Gene editing tool [ 15 ]. The advent of gene editing tools
represents the most significant revolution in genetic research. This includes
technologies like zinc-finger nucleases, transcription activator–like
effector nucleases (TALENs), and clustered regularly interspersed short palindromic
repeats (CRISPRs)/CRISPR-associated (Cas) systems [ 20 ][ 21 ][ 22 ]. The CRISPR/Cas9 system allows for precise insertion
of transgenes into specific genomic locations in mice, ensuring high efficiency and
control over integration sites, facilitating the generation of knock-in transgenic
mice. Each of these strategies has its advantages and limitations, and the choice of
method depends on factors such as the desired level of precision, efficiency, and
experimental requirements.

Mouse modeling PCa is complex due to fundamental disparities in prostate
biology and tumorigenesis among mice and humans. In comparison, one in six human
males is at risk of developing PCa during their lifetime, whereas spontaneous PCa
development is rare in mice, the translatability of findings [ 23 ]. Another challenge is that the mouse prostate is not
a single organ but consists of four distinct lobes. In view of this, there are
concerns regarding which mouse prostate lobe(s) resemble the human prostate the
most. Further complicating the interpretation of experimental results is the
variation in the stroma surrounding mouse and human prostate lobes [ 24 ][ 25 ]. This
review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the historical development and
phenotypic description of the most widely utilized transgenic/genetically engineered
mouse models of PCa that replicate the genomic variations that appear in human PCa.
Moreover, the review also highlights the challenges/limitations of using mice models
that are first- or second-generation derived. We have extensively discussed each
model's conceptual grasp, current developments, and clinically pertinent
issues and highlighted the strengths and challenges/limitations of first- or
second-generation derived mice models to understand pathobiology and molecular
aspects of PCa.

Conclusion & Future Insights

Overall, mouse models have proven valuable tools for PCa research but have
several limitations, as discussed. An ideal mouse model should adhere to the
following principles: (i) it should encompass all stages of PCa initiation and
progression, exhibiting easily identifiable features that mirror both the
histopathological and molecular aspects of human PCa; (ii) at early stages, the
model should demonstrate AR biology and exhibit a slow progression rate;
additionally, it should possess the ability to metastasize to the same sites as
human PCa, while maintaining an intact immune system. The emerging concept of
personalized mouse models, Co-clinical Trials, has been introduced to overcome these
pitfalls. These trials enable the real-time integration of the murine and human
tumor data. In Co-clinical Trials, GEMMs are utilized to guide therapy in an ongoing
human patient trial toward future clinical management of the patient's tumor
[ 143 ].

GEMMs are considered indispensable for preclinical research and superior to
cancer cell inoculation models. One unique feature of GEMMs is the ability to
develop de novo tumors in a natural immune-proficient microenvironment. In addition,
advanced GEMM-derived tumors closely resemble the histopathological and molecular
characteristics of their human counterparts, exhibiting genetic diversity and
progressing spontaneously toward metastatic conditions [ 144 ]. Furthermore, GEMMs of PCa represent potent tools
for investigating the mechanisms underlying disease progression and the response to
therapy. A recent study detailed the development, examination, and validation of a
platform designed to immobilize and precisely target tumors in mice using
stereotactic ablative radiation therapy (SART). This approach has been observed to
modify the tumor stroma and immune environment, improving survival outcomes in GEMMs
of primary PCa and exhibiting synergy with androgen deprivation [ 145 ].

Nevertheless, despite the SART application, complete pathologic responses
were not attained in GEMMs. Consequently, investigating the mechanisms of radiation
resistance in GEMMs of PCa presents an intriguing area for further exploration. The
onset, advancement, and development of CRPC entail intricate interactions between
tumor cells and the host immune system [ 146 ]. GEMMs offer a unique prospect to investigate the inherent factors
influencing tumor response and assess the impact of extrinsic determinants. It has
been reported that GEMMs of PCa have differing quantities of tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes characterized by notable spatial heterogeneity [ 145 ].

Using these mouse models has led to the development of new imaging
techniques that can detect bone metastases at an earlier stage and tumor
microenvironment mechanisms for bone metastatic disease progression, potentially
allowing for more effective treatment [ 102 ][ 147 ]. Human PCa represents
a heterogeneous diversity at inter- and intra-tumor and inter-patient levels, which
significantly influences the prognosis, choice of therapy, recurrence, and emergence
of treatment resistance in PCa [ 148 ]. In
treatment-naive primary tumors, there is pre-existing AR heterogeneity, which is
magnified during AR signaling inhibitors (ARSIs) treatment and notably pronounced in
CRPC [ 149 ]. After extensive research
spanning several decades to create GEMMs with molecular changes akin to human PCa,
no mouse model has fully reflected the heterogeneity of human tumors or accurately
recapitulated the observed phenotype in humans due to genetic, evolutionary,
species-specific, and clinical heterogeneity [ 150 ][ 151 ][ 152 ].

Initially, basal cells were identified as the originating cells for PCa, but
emerging evidence indicates that luminal cells are now considered the preferred cell
of origin for PCa [ 153 ]. The emergence of
single-cell RNA-sequencing technology has offered new insights into prostate
epithelium heterogeneity, which is conserved between mouse and human [ 154 ]. Therefore, basal and luminal specific
promoters can be valuable in identifying drivers of PCa progression precisely to
each compartment.

Nevertheless, many genes remain untested, and ongoing research is necessary
to uncover new genes and improve the complexity of mouse models to reflect human PCa
better. The field of GEMMs for PCa is entering a new phase known as next-generation
GEMMs, characterized by applying novel tools and ideas to enhance our understanding
of lethal disease biology. These advancements have the potential to lead to the
foundation for more accurate and relevant models for studying PCa and developing new
therapeutics.
