---
pmid: '8253070'
title: A new pair of B-type cyclins from Saccharomyces cerevisiae that function early
  in the cell cycle.
authors:
- Kühne C
- Linder P
journal: EMBO J
year: '1993'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC413620
doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1993.tb06018.x
---

# A new pair of B-type cyclins from Saccharomyces cerevisiae that function early in the cell cycle.
**Authors:** Kühne C, Linder P
**Journal:** EMBO J (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1002/j.1460-2075.1993.tb06018.x](https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1460-2075.1993.tb06018.x)
**PMC:** [PMC413620](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC413620/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1993 Sep;12(9):3437-47. doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1993.tb06018.x.

A new pair of B-type cyclins from Saccharomyces cerevisiae that function early 
in the cell cycle.

Kühne C(1), Linder P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Basel, Switzerland.

Two new B-type cyclin genes from Saccharomyces cerevisiae, called CLB5 and CLB6, 
are located in a tail to tail arrangement adjacent to the G2/M phase promoting 
cyclins CLB2 and CLB1, respectively. These genomic cyclin arrays are flanked by 
tRNAs and repeated sequences of Ty elements suggesting an intrachromosomal gene 
duplication followed by an interchromosomal gene duplication. Based on their 
deduced protein sequence the CLB5 and CLB6 genes form a new pair of B-type 
cyclins. They are most related to each other and then to the deduced protein 
sequence of their adjacent genes CLB1 and CLB2. Both genes are periodically 
expressed, peaking early in the cell cycle. Loss of function mutants are viable, 
but clb5- mutants exhibit a delay in S phase whereas clb6- mutants show a delay 
in late G1 and/or S phase. The clb5 mutant phenotype is somewhat more pronounced 
in a double null mutant. Both cyclins have the potential to interact with the 
p34CDC28 kinase in vivo.

DOI: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1993.tb06018.x
PMCID: PMC413620
PMID: 8253070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Preparing to download ... HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
