---
pmid: '11238845'
title: 'Vaccinia virus blocks gamma interferon signal transduction: viral VH1 phosphatase
  reverses Stat1 activation.'
authors:
- Najarro P
- Traktman P
- Lewis JA
journal: J Virol
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC114112
doi: 10.1128/JVI.75.7.3185-3196.2001
---

# Vaccinia virus blocks gamma interferon signal transduction: viral VH1 phosphatase reverses Stat1 activation.
**Authors:** Najarro P, Traktman P, Lewis JA
**Journal:** J Virol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.75.7.3185-3196.2001](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.75.7.3185-3196.2001)
**PMC:** [PMC114112](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC114112/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2001 Apr;75(7):3185-96. doi: 10.1128/JVI.75.7.3185-3196.2001.

Vaccinia virus blocks gamma interferon signal transduction: viral VH1 
phosphatase reverses Stat1 activation.

Najarro P(1), Traktman P, Lewis JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy & Cell Biology, SUNY Downstate Medical Center, 
Brooklyn, New York 11203, USA.

We have analyzed the effects of vaccinia virus (VV) on gamma interferon 
(IFN-gamma) signal transduction. Infection of cells with VV 1 to 2 h prior to 
treatment with IFN-gamma inhibits phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of 
Stat1 and consequently blocks accumulation of mRNAs normally induced by 
IFN-gamma. While phosphorylation of other proteins in the IFN-gamma pathway was 
not affected, activation of Stat1 by other ligand-receptor systems was also 
blocked by VV. This block of Stat1 activation was dose dependent, and although 
viral protein synthesis was not required, entry and uncoating of viral cores 
appear to be needed to block the accumulation of phosphorylated Stat1. These 
results suggest that a virion component is responsible for the effect. VV 
virions contain a phosphatase (VH1) that is sensitive to the phosphatase 
inhibitor Na(3)VO(4) but not to okadaic acid. Addition of Na(3)VO(4) but not 
okadaic acid restored normal Stat1 phosphorylation levels in VV-infected cells. 
Moreover, virions containing reduced levels of VH1 were unable to block the 
IFN-gamma signaling pathway. In vitro studies show that the phosphatase can bind 
and dephosphorylate Stat1, indicating that this transcription factor can be a 
substrate for VH1. Our results reveal a novel mechanism by which VV interferes 
with the onset of host immune responses by blocking the IFN-gamma signal cascade 
through the dephosphorylating activity of the viral phosphatase VH1.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.7.3185-3196.2001
PMCID: PMC114112
PMID: 11238845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

We have analyzed the effects of vaccinia virus (VV) on gamma interferon (IFN-γ) signal transduction. Infection of cells with VV 1 to 2 h prior to treatment with IFN-γ inhibits phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of Stat1 and consequently blocks accumulation of mRNAs normally induced by IFN-γ. While phosphorylation of other proteins in the IFN-γ pathway was not affected, activation of Stat1 by other ligand-receptor systems was also blocked by VV. This block of Stat1 activation was dose dependent, and although viral protein synthesis was not required, entry and uncoating of viral cores appear to be needed to block the accumulation of phosphorylated Stat1. These results suggest that a virion component is responsible for the effect. VV virions contain a phosphatase (VH1) that is sensitive to the phosphatase inhibitor Na 3 VO 4 but not to okadaic acid. Addition of Na 3 VO 4 but not okadaic acid restored normal Stat1 phosphorylation levels in VV-infected cells. Moreover, virions containing reduced levels of VH1 were unable to block the IFN-γ signaling pathway. In vitro studies show that the phosphatase can bind and dephosphorylate Stat1, indicating that this transcription factor can be a substrate for VH1. Our results reveal a novel mechanism by which VV interferes with the onset of host immune responses by blocking the IFN-γ signal cascade through the dephosphorylating activity of the viral phosphatase VH1.

DISCUSSION

IFN-γ is a key cytokine involved in protection against viral infection. IFN produced in response to virus infection induces IFN-responsive cells to create an antiviral state that efficiently prevents the spread of the virus. Knockout mice deficient for IFN-γR ( 26 , 48 ) show increased susceptibility to infection by VV but not to VSV or Semliki Forest virus. Viruses have evolved a series of strategies to counteract this host defense mechanism. In particular, VV has several genes encoding proteins that interfere with responses to IFNs. The products of VV genes E3L and K3L inhibit the activation and/or activity of PKR ( 6 , 8 ). Moreover, the VV analog of the IFN-γR encoded by gene B8R competes with and blocks the binding of IFN-γ to its natural receptor ( 46 , 59 ). We demonstrate here that VV can block IFN-γ responses by another mechanism, inhibiting the IFN-γ signal transduction pathway. The data presented here strongly support a role for the virion-associated VH1 phosphatase in this effect.
