---
pmid: '34591612'
title: A protein interaction landscape of breast cancer.
authors:
- Kim M
- Park J
- Bouhaddou M
- Kim K
- Rojc A
- Modak M
- Soucheray M
- McGregor MJ
- O'Leary P
- Wolf D
- Stevenson E
- Foo TK
- Mitchell D
- Herrington KA
- Muñoz DP
- Tutuncuoglu B
- Chen KH
- Zheng F
- Kreisberg JF
- Diolaiti ME
- Gordan JD
- Coppé JP
- Swaney DL
- Xia B
- van 't Veer L
- Ashworth A
- Ideker T
- Krogan NJ
journal: Science
year: '2021'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC9040556
doi: 10.1126/science.abf3066
---

# A protein interaction landscape of breast cancer.
**Authors:** Kim M, Park J, Bouhaddou M, Kim K, Rojc A, Modak M, Soucheray M, McGregor MJ, O'Leary P, Wolf D, Stevenson E, Foo TK, Mitchell D, Herrington KA, Muñoz DP, Tutuncuoglu B, Chen KH, Zheng F, Kreisberg JF, Diolaiti ME, Gordan JD, Coppé JP, Swaney DL, Xia B, van 't Veer L, Ashworth A, Ideker T, Krogan NJ
**Journal:** Science (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.abf3066](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abf3066)
**PMC:** [PMC9040556](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9040556/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2021 Oct;374(6563):eabf3066. doi: 10.1126/science.abf3066. Epub 2021 
Oct 1.

A protein interaction landscape of breast cancer.

Kim M(1)(2)(3)(4), Park J(4)(5), Bouhaddou M(1)(2)(3)(4), Kim K(1)(2)(3)(4), 
Rojc A(1)(2)(3)(4), Modak M(1)(2)(3)(4), Soucheray M(1)(2)(3)(4), McGregor 
MJ(1)(2)(3)(4), O'Leary P(4)(6), Wolf D(4)(6), Stevenson E(1)(2)(3)(4), Foo 
TK(7), Mitchell D(3)(6)(8), Herrington KA(9), Muñoz DP(4)(6), Tutuncuoglu 
B(1)(2)(3)(4), Chen KH(1)(2)(3)(4), Zheng F(4)(5), Kreisberg JF(4)(5), Diolaiti 
ME(4)(6), Gordan JD(3)(6)(8), Coppé JP(4)(6), Swaney DL(1)(2)(3)(4), Xia B(7), 
van 't Veer L(4)(6), Ashworth A(4)(6), Ideker T(4)(5)(10), Krogan 
NJ(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, 
San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)The J. David Gladstone Institute of Data Science and Biotechnology, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Quantitative Biosciences Institute, University of California, San Francisco, 
CA, USA.
(4)The Cancer Cell Map Initiative, San Francisco and La Jolla, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Radiation Oncology, Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New 
Brunswick, NJ, USA.
(8)Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, 
USA.
(9)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Center for Advanced Light 
Microscopy, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2021 Oct;374(6563):38-39. doi: 10.1126/science.abl9080.

Cancers have been associated with a diverse array of genomic alterations. To 
help mechanistically understand such alterations in breast-invasive carcinoma, 
we applied affinity purification–mass spectrometry to delineate comprehensive 
biophysical interaction networks for 40 frequently altered breast cancer (BC) 
proteins, with and without relevant mutations, across three human breast cell 
lines. These networks identify cancer-specific protein-protein interactions 
(PPIs), interconnected and enriched for common and rare cancer mutations, that 
are substantially rewired by the introduction of key BC mutations. Our analysis 
identified BPIFA1 and SCGB2A1 as PIK3CA-interacting proteins, which repress 
PI3K-AKT signaling, and uncovered USP28 and UBE2N as functionally relevant 
interactors of BRCA1. We also show that the protein phosphatase 1 regulatory 
subunit spinophilin interacts with and regulates dephosphorylation of BRCA1 to 
promote DNA double-strand break repair. Thus, PPI landscapes provide a powerful 
framework for mechanistically interpreting disease genomic data and can identify 
valuable therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1126/science.abf3066
PMCID: PMC9040556
PMID: 34591612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Cancers have been associated with a diverse array of genomic alterations. To help mechanistically understand such alterations in breast invasive carcinoma, we have applied affinity-purification mass spectrometry to delineate comprehensive biophysical interaction networks for 40 frequently altered breast cancer (BC) proteins, with and without relevant mutations, across three human breast cell lines. These networks identify cancer-specific protein-protein interactions (PPIs), interconnect and enrich for common and rare cancer mutations, and are substantially rewired by the introduction of key BC mutations. Our analysis identified PIK3CA-interacting proteins which repress AKT signaling and has uncovered USP28 and UBE2N as functionally relevant interactors of BRCA1. We also show that the PP1 phosphatase regulatory subunit, Spinophilin, interacts with and regulates dephosphorylation of BRCA1 to promote DNA double-strand break repair. Thus, PPI landscapes provide a powerful framework for mechanistically interpreting disease genomic data and can identify valuable new therapeutic targets.

DISCUSSION

The cell is comprised of a series of protein complexes, or “machines” ( 107 ), that function together in an elaborate network of pathways. Mutations, such as seen in cancer, perturb the machines and therefore the network of pathways ( 108 ). Understanding the machines and networks in healthy and diseased states is crucial for a deeper understanding of disease biology and ultimately the discovery of new therapeutic strategies and the application of precision medicine ( 109 ). Using this premise as an underlying motivation, we generated comprehensive interaction maps for 40 frequently altered BC proteins. This large-scale study of biophysical interactions in BC and across three cell lines of human breast tissue origin provides a PPI resource to study BC biology and to contextualize uncharacterized mutations within signaling pathways and protein complexes. Approximately 78% of PPIs we identified have not been previously reported ( Fig. 1C ), and 81% are not shared across cell lines ( Fig. 1E ). The cell line PPI specificity we observe in this study and our accompanying manuscript (Swaney et al.), as well as in a recent large-scale AP-MS study ( 27 ), speaks to the complexity of PPI networks and their heterogeneity among different cell types, calling for more studies to deeply characterize these networks in a wider range of cellular contexts. Given that each BC subtype arises by distinct tumorigenic mechanisms due to different genomic alterations, PPIs from cell lines representing other BC subtypes will most likely capture additional sets of interactors reflecting their distinct tumorigenic mechanisms. Our results also suggest that protein abundance in a cell line is not the sole mechanism for PPI specificity ( fig. S1D ). Presumably other features, such as differential posttranslational modifications (PTM), cellular compartmentalization, and/or mutational status of proteins may contribute to cell type-specificity. Notably, prey proteins enriched to either of the two BC cell lines are more frequently mutated in breast tumors than preys from non-tumorigenic cells ( Fig. 1E ), implying that proteins interacting with cancer drivers may also contribute to the onset of cancer.

Using the systematic proteomic approach described in the manuscript, we have identified previously unidentified interactors of PIK3CA that negatively regulate the PI3K/AKT pathway ( Fig. 3D – H ). Interestingly, RNA expressions of several of these interactors (e.g. BPIFA1, BPIFB1, and MUC5B) were found to be correlated in human airway epithelial cells ( 110 ), implying that they may be controlled under the same transcriptional regulatory program and/or functionally related. Our results reveal that they play a role in the PI3K/AKT signaling cascade in BC context. BPIFA1 is a lipid-binding protein with antimicrobial and immunomodulatory functions ( 111 ). It is significantly downregulated in nasopharyngeal carcinoma ( 112 ) and its single-nucleotide polymorphisms are associated with increased susceptibility to this tumor type ( 113 ). BPIFA1 is known to increase the expression of PTEN via downregulating the miR-141 oncogene ( 114 ), thus knockdown of BPIFA1 could indirectly activate PI3K/AKT. The BPIFA1-PIK3CA interaction we identified and the inhibition of WT PIK3CA kinase activity by BPIFA1 in vitro suggests that BPIFA1 may also directly modulate PI3K/AKT via PPI, which warrants a structural study of the complex. Another PIK3CA interactor, SCGB2A1, is a small secreted protein highly differentially expressed in multiple types of cancer including breast and endometrium ( 115 , 116 ). Previous studies have shown that SCGB2A1 is expressed at lower levels in luminal BC compared to histologically normal breast epithelium ( 117 ), and that decreased SCGB2A1 expression in endometrial tumors is significantly correlated with higher grade, advanced stage, and worse overall survival ( 118 ). Neither the BPIFA1 or SCGB2A1 gene harbors recurrent focal deep deletions, missense mutations, or truncating mutations in their coding regions among 996 breast tumors in TCGA analysis ( 2 ). However, SCGB2A1 harbored loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in 10% of breast tumors (7% LOH in all tumors) according to a recent study ( 119 ), which suggests that its allelic imbalance may contribute to the development of tumors.

We also uncovered a number of previously unidentified interactors of the well-studied BRCA1, which is tightly connected to DNA repair processes, including Spinophilin. Interestingly, both knockdown and overexpression of Spinophilin led to significant impairment in DSB repair by both HR and SSA pathways ( Fig. 5C , E – G ), establishing that this protein has a defined role in DNA repair. An intriguing question is how the alterations of Spinophilin expression interfere with HR and SSA repair activity. Given the role of Spinophilin in dephosphorylation, one plausible explanation is that prolonged phosphorylation or prevailed dephosphorylation of BRCA1 and other DDR proteins is inhibitory to multiple steps during DNA repair, including DSB-end resection which is a prerequisite for HR and SSA. In agreement with this hypothesis, continuous DNA damage signaling and phosphorylation of several DDR proteins (including H2AX, NBN, RPA2, and CHEK2) induced by short double-stranded DNA molecules (mimicking DNA DSB) was shown to disorganize the cellular DNA repair system and inhibit DSB repair ( 120 ). Alternatively, but not exclusively, Spinophilin may play a role in initiating the DSB repair process by removing constitutive phosphorylations that inhibit the function of DDR proteins. Supporting this scenario, a phospho-proteomic study revealed that over one-third of the captured phospho-peptides were dephosphorylated within minutes of DNA damage ( 121 ). Additionally, Spinophilin may be involved in counteracting DSB-induced phosphorylation events, thus promoting recycling of DDR proteins as DNA damage is being repaired, possibly through its interaction with BRCA1.

Finally, while the approach we described in this study was applied to BC, it is equally powerful against other cancers, including head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) (Swaney et al., accompanying manuscript). Efforts such as this will ultimately lead to hierarchical maps of protein complexes and systems in both healthy and diseased cells (Zheng et al., accompanying manuscript), which, based on the mutational landscape, can be predictive for use of known treatments and can also be used to uncover previously unidentified therapeutic strategies across a multitude of disease areas.
