---
pmid: '25753001'
title: A Protein Interaction between β-Catenin and Dnmt1 Regulates Wnt Signaling and
  DNA Methylation in Colorectal Cancer Cells.
authors:
- Song J
- Du Z
- Ravasz M
- Dong B
- Wang Z
- Ewing RM
journal: Mol Cancer Res
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC4470773
doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0644
---

# A Protein Interaction between β-Catenin and Dnmt1 Regulates Wnt Signaling and DNA Methylation in Colorectal Cancer Cells.
**Authors:** Song J, Du Z, Ravasz M, Dong B, Wang Z, Ewing RM
**Journal:** Mol Cancer Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0644](https://doi.org/10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0644)
**PMC:** [PMC4470773](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4470773/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cancer Res. 2015 Jun;13(6):969-81. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0644.
Epub  2015 Mar 9.

A Protein Interaction between β-Catenin and Dnmt1 Regulates Wnt Signaling and 
DNA Methylation in Colorectal Cancer Cells.

Song J(1), Du Z(2), Ravasz M(3), Dong B(4), Wang Z(5), Ewing RM(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio.
(2)Department of Genetics and Genome Science, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio.
(3)Centre for Biological Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, 
United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Genetics and Genome Science, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio. Department of Biochemistry, Wan Nan Medical College, Wu Hu, An 
Hui, China.
(5)Department of Genetics and Genome Science, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio. rob.ewing@soton.ac.uk zxw22@case.edu.
(6)Centre for Biological Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, 
United Kingdom. rob.ewing@soton.ac.uk zxw22@case.edu.

Aberrant activation of the Wnt signaling pathway is an important step in the 
initiation and progression of tumor development in diverse cancers. The central 
effector of canonical Wnt signaling, β-catenin (CTNNB1), is a multifunctional 
protein, and has been extensively studied with respect to its roles in cell-cell 
adhesion and in regulation of Wnt-driven transcription. Here, a novel mass 
spectrometry-based proteomics technique in colorectal cancer cells expressing 
stabilized β-catenin, was used to identify a protein-protein interaction between 
β-catenin and DNA methyltransferase I (Dnmt1) protein, the primary regulator of 
DNA methylation patterns in mammalian cells. Dnmt1 and β-catenin strongly 
colocalized in the nuclei of colorectal cancer cells, and the interaction is 
mediated by the central domain of the Dnmt1 protein. Dnmt1 protein abundance is 
dependent upon the levels of β-catenin, and is increased in cells expressing 
stabilized mutant β-catenin. Conversely, the Dnmt1 regulates the levels of 
nuclear β-catenin and β-catenin/TCF-driven transcription. In addition, 
lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1/KDM1A), a regulator of DNMT1 stability, was 
identified as a component of the Dnmt1-β-catenin protein complex and 
perturbation of the Dnmt1-β-catenin interaction altered DNA methylation. In 
summary, a functional protein-protein interaction was identified between two 
critically important oncoproteins, in turn revealing a link between Wnt 
signaling and downstream nuclear functions mediated by Dnmt1.
IMPLICATIONS: Two critical oncoproteins, Dnmt1 and β-catenin, mutually regulate 
one each other's levels and activities in colorectal cancer cells.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0644
PMCID: PMC4470773
PMID: 25753001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Aberrant activation of the Wnt signaling pathway is an important step in the initiation and progression of tumor development in diverse cancers. The central effector of canonical Wnt signaling, β-catenin (CTNNB1), is a multifunctional protein, and has been extensively studied with respect to its roles in cell-cell adhesion and in regulation of Wnt-driven transcription. Here, a novel mass spectrometry-based proteomics technique in colorectal cancer cells expressing stabilized β-catenin, was used to identify a protein-protein interaction between β-catenin and DNA methyltransferase I (Dnmt1) protein, the primary regulator of DNA methylation patterns in mammalian cells. Dnmt1 and β-catenin strongly co-localized in the nuclei of colorectal cancer cells, and the interaction is mediated by the central domain of the Dnmt1 protein. Dnmt1 protein abundance is dependent upon the levels of β-catenin, and is increased in cells expressing stabilized mutant β-catenin. Conversely, the Dnmt1 regulates the levels of nuclear β-catenin and β-catenin/TCF driven transcription. In addition, lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1/KDM1A), a regulator of DNMT1 stability, was identified as a component of the Dnmt1/β-catenin protein complex and perturbation of the Dnmt1/β-catenin interaction altered DNA methylation. In summary, a functional protein-protein interaction was identified between two critically important oncoproteins, in turn revealing a link between Wnt signaling and downstream nuclear functions mediated by Dnmt1.

INTRODUCTION

Cancer cells typically exhibit complex, multi-layered perturbations of signalling pathways and regulatory mechanisms ( 1 ). Dys-regulation of the Wnt signalling pathway is a major factor in the initiation and progression of colorectal cancer. Canonical or β-catenin-dependent Wnt signalling is the best-defined branch of Wnt signalling, and is activated by binding of a Wnt ligand with specific cell surface receptor complexes. The subsequent signalling cascade leads to accumulation and nuclear translocation of β-catenin, the central effecter of canonical Wnt signalling. Activating mutations of β-catenin, that stabilize the protein, or loss of function of tumour suppressors such as Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC), are causal events in the initiation of colorectal cancer ( 2 , 3 ). β-catenin is one of the best studied oncoproteins and diverse β-catenin protein-protein interactions have been identified. Recent studies, for example, have revealed the association of β-catenin with chromatin and epigenetic modifying complexes ( 4 , 5 ), and it is clear that our knowledge of β-catenin protein function is quite incomplete.

In this study we identify a protein-protein interaction between β-catenin and Dnmt1, the primary maintenance DNA methyltransferase in mammalian cells. Dnmt1 (Dnmt1 refers to the protein product of the DNMT1 gene) expression is altered in many different tumours ( 6 – 10 ), although somatic mutations of DNMT1 are relatively rare events in human cancers. Although best known for its role in DNA methylation, other functions have been defined for Dnmt1 protein, including the formation of transcriptional repressor complexes with HDAC and DMAP1 proteins ( 11 ) and with the LSD1 histone demethylase ( 12 ). In addition, many protein-protein interactions between Dnmt1 and transcription factors have been identified, principally mediated via the N-terminal regulatory region of the protein ( 13 ). DNMT1 itself is subject to multiple layers of regulation, including transcriptional ( 14 ) and post-translational regulation through control of Dnmt1 protein stability ( 13 , 15 , 16 ). How these different mechanisms contribute to regulation of Dnmt1 (and DNA methyltransferase activities in general) in cancer cells is only partially understood. In addition, in many cancer cells aberrant expression of DNA methyltransferases occurs alongside dys-regulated signal transduction pathways, but the extent to which signalling pathways regulate Dnmt1 and associated functions remains to be determined.

Here we use mass-spectrometry, co-immunoprecipitation and confocal microscopy to identify and characterize the Dnmt1-β-catenin interaction. We show that the interaction is mediated by the central portion of the Dnmt1 protein and that Dnmt1 and β-catenin protein levels are mutually dependent. We show that Dnmt1 protein levels are responsive to exogenous Wnt activation that the response is not mediated via transcriptional mechanisms. Finally, to investigate the functional consequences of the Dnmt1-β-catenin interaction, we show that the interaction with Dnmt1 protein regulates both the level of β-catenin and β-catenin/TCF-driven transcriptional activity, and that CpG methylation of an imprinted locus is significantly reduced in cells lacking β-catenin. In summary, our study identifies a novel mechanism by which the levels of these two important oncoproteins are regulated in cancer cells and points to a regulatory link between Wnt signalling and epigenetic functions of Dnmt1.

DISCUSSION

Here we analyse an interaction between Dnmt1 and β-catenin proteins that mutually regulates the levels of each protein in colorectal cancer cells. The regulation is not mediated via transcriptional activation of DNMT1, but instead through the interaction of Dnmt1 protein with β-catenin in the nucleus. Given the critical roles of both β-catenin and Dnmt1 cells in normal as well as cancer cells, our results point to an important mechanism by which the two proteins cross-regulate. We found that the lysine demethylase, LSD1, which regulates Dnmt1 stability, is present in Dnmt1-β-catenin protein complexes, suggesting that the stabilization of Dnmt1 in these protein complexes is mediated via lysine methylation. We investigated the downstream functional consequences of the β-catenin-Dnmt1 association, and showed that Dnmt1 protein levels regulate β-catenin/TCF signalling and that the absence of β-catenin impacts CpG methylation status, pointing to a regulatory link between Wnt/β-catenin signalling and the downstream functions of Dnmt1.

Whilst protein stability of Dnmt1 and β-catenin is an important outcome of the interaction between the proteins, the precise molecular mechanisms that result in increased β-catenin/TCF signalling activity remain to be determined. Although β-catenin expression rescues Dnmt1 expression in CTNNB1 KO -HCT116 cells, we did not observe rescue of β-catenin protein levels in DNMT1 KO -HCT116 cells following expression of Dnmt1 ( Figure 3 ). This may imply that the increased β-catenin/TCF signalling activity induced by Dnmt1 is not due to stabilisation and increased levels of β-catenin but from an alternative mechanism by which Dnmt1 increases β-catenin transcriptional activity. Other studies have shown that Dnmt1 can regulate transcription through protein interactions, in a methylation-independent manner. The Dnmt1 N-terminus was shown to mediate the interaction of Dnmt1 with HDAC and DMAP1 proteins, to form transcriptional repressor complexes ( 11 ), and many interactions between Dnmt1 and transcription factors have been identified ( 13 ). E-cadherin expression (in HCT116 cells) is regulated by an interaction between Dnmt1 and the transcriptional repressor Snail1, and in the same study that loss of the Dnmt1 N-terminal domains promoted β-catenin translocation to the nucleus ( 36 ). Stabilization of Dnmt1 protein, but not alterations of DNMT1 transcript levels are the cause of DNMT1 dys-regulation in human mammary epithelial cells, and this stabilization is mediated via the Dnmt1 protein N-terminus ( 37 ). How LSD1 functions in the Dnmt1-β-catenin interaction remains to be determined, since LSD1 is known to regulate Dnmt1 stability via demethylation ( 34 ). Other modifying proteins may also be important; interactions of Dnmt1 protein with HAUSP/USP7, UHRF1 and Tip60 proteins regulate Dnmt1 by ubiquitination and acetylation ( 15 , 38 ). Tip60 interacts with both Dnmt1 and β-catenin ( 39 ), and further mass- spectrometry analysis will determine whether Tip60 is present in β-catenin-Dnmt1 protein complexes. Although we previously showed that Tip60 acetylates Dnmt1 protein which promotes Dnmt1 degradation ( 15 ), the significance of the β-catenin-Tip60 interaction is as yet undetermined.

Our study points to a mechanism of cross-talk between Wnt signalling and DNA methylation mediated via a protein-protein interaction between β-catenin and Dnmt1. How this cross-talk manifests itself in tumours is as yet unknown, although in mouse, hypomorphic Dnmt1 alleles in the Apc Min background substantially reduce the number of polyps observed ( 40 ). Although the suppression of polyp formation was attributed to decreased CpG island methylation in the Dnmt1 hypomorphic mice, reduced Dnmt1 protein levels may also suppress polyp formation by destabilizing β-catenin and reducing Wnt/β-catenin driven transcriptional activity via the mechanism that we have described. Transcriptional regulation of DNMT1 by Wnt has also been shown ( 41 ). Using colorectal HT-29 cells (expressing truncated APC) the authors showed that transfection of full length APC reduces DNMT1 mRNA and DNMT1 promoter-reporter activity. In addition the authors also inhibited TCF-driven transcription using a dominant-negative TCF and found that this also reduces DNMT1 mRNA levels, indicating transcriptional control of DNMT1 expression. In our study we do not observe transcriptional effects of Wnt/β-catenin on DNMT1 (as measured by steady-state RNA levels), but instead observed dramatic effects of Wnt and β-catenin on Dnmt1 protein levels. These differences may imply that activation of Wnt/β-catenin by APC mutations is not entirely functionally equivalent to activation by stabilizing CTNNB1/β-catenin mutations. We also note, as did the authors of the previous study, that there are no apparent TCF binding sites in the DNMT1 promoter and so the transcriptional activation of DNMT1 is unlikely to be mediated via direct binding of β-catenin/TCF in the DNMT1 promoter. Taken together, our study and these previous studies show that multi-layered communication exists between DNMT1 and Wnt/β-catenin signalling. Although these and previous studies have been performed in cancer cell models, future work should establish the possible importance of cross-talk between DNMT1 and Wnt/β-catenin signalling in clinical samples. In addition, whilst our study has identified that an interaction between Wnt/ β-catenin and Dnmt1 may alter DNA methylation patterns on a specific locus, it would be interesting to measure global patterns of DNA methylation to see how widespread this effect is.

Interestingly, several studies have demonstrated methylation-independent functions for Dnmt1. In HCT116 cells, Dnmt1 proteins lacking the C-terminal catalytic domain function as transcriptional repressors at specific loci ( 12 ). The authors speculated that Dnmt1 serves as a scaffold for recruitment of transcriptional repressive complexes including interaction with the LSD1 histone demethylase. Intriguingly, knock-down of Dnmt1 protein was shown to regulate gene-expression via a methylation-independent and histone deacetylation – independent mechanism ( 42 ). Our analysis showed that knock-down of Dnmt1 protein can regulate TCF/β-catenin transcriptional activity. Future studies will establish whether Dnmt1 protein levels also regulate endogenous Wnt/β-catenin targets. The role played by chromatin should also be considered. The interplay between soluble nuclear Dnmt1 proteins and chromatin-associated Dnmt1 is complex. For example, Dnmt1 protein forms soluble complexes with USP7 that then form trimeric complexes with chromatin-bound UHRF1 ( 30 ). In addition, in contrast to DNMT3A/B, a substantial portion of Dnmt1 protein appears to exist as a soluble pool in the nucleus rather than being associated with chromatin ( 43 , 44 ). Finally, whilst the primary nuclear function of β-catenin is to regulate transcription via association with TCF transcription factors, our study shows that regulation of other proteins via stabilizing protein-protein interactions may also be an important function of nuclear β-catenin.

In summary, our work identifies a novel mechanism by which the levels of two key oncoproteins, β-catenin and Dnmt1 are regulated in cancer cells. The β-catenin-Dnmt1 interaction stabilizes each protein, and in turn regulates downstream β-catenin and Dnmt1 functions. Our study indicates a possible cancer-relevant mechanism of cross-regulation between Wnt signalling and DNA methylation. Given that the Wnt pathway plays a critical role in development and tissue differentiation, the mechanism revealed in this study could also explain how Wnt signalling drives tissue differentiation.
