---
pmid: '17210642'
title: The Bloom's syndrome helicase is critical for development and function of the
  alphabeta T-cell lineage.
authors:
- Babbe H
- Chester N
- Leder P
- Reizis B
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1820471
doi: 10.1128/MCB.01402-06
---

# The Bloom's syndrome helicase is critical for development and function of the alphabeta T-cell lineage.
**Authors:** Babbe H, Chester N, Leder P, Reizis B
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.01402-06](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.01402-06)
**PMC:** [PMC1820471](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1820471/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Mar;27(5):1947-59. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01402-06. Epub 2007
Jan  8.

The Bloom's syndrome helicase is critical for development and function of the 
alphabeta T-cell lineage.

Babbe H(1), Chester N, Leder P, Reizis B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Columbia University Medical Center, 701 W. 168th 
St., New York, NY 10032, USA. bvr2101@columbia.edu

Bloom's syndrome is a genetic disorder characterized by increased incidence of 
cancer and an immunodeficiency of unknown origin. The BLM gene mutated in 
Bloom's syndrome encodes a DNA helicase involved in the maintenance of genomic 
integrity. To explore the role of BLM in the immune system, we ablated murine 
Blm in the T-cell lineage. In the absence of Blm, thymocytes were severely 
reduced in numbers and displayed a developmental block at the beta-selection 
checkpoint that was partially p53 dependent. Blm-deficient thymocytes rearranged 
their T-cell receptor (TCR) beta genes normally yet failed to survive and 
proliferate in response to pre-TCR signaling. Furthermore, peripheral T cells 
were reduced in numbers, manifested defective homeostatic and TCR-induced 
proliferation, and produced extensive chromosomal damage. Finally, CD4(+) and 
CD8(+) T-cell responses were impaired upon antigen challenge. Thus, by ensuring 
genomic stability, Blm serves a vital role for development, maintenance, and 
function of T lymphocytes, suggesting a basis for the immune deficiency in 
Bloom's syndrome.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.01402-06
PMCID: PMC1820471
PMID: 17210642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Bloom's syndrome is a genetic disorder characterized by increased incidence of cancer and an immunodeficiency of unknown origin. The BLM gene mutated in Bloom's syndrome encodes a DNA helicase involved in the maintenance of genomic integrity. To explore the role of BLM in the immune system, we ablated murine Blm in the T-cell lineage. In the absence of Blm, thymocytes were severely reduced in numbers and displayed a developmental block at the β-selection checkpoint that was partially p53 dependent. Blm-deficient thymocytes rearranged their T-cell receptor (TCR) β genes normally yet failed to survive and proliferate in response to pre-TCR signaling. Furthermore, peripheral T cells were reduced in numbers, manifested defective homeostatic and TCR-induced proliferation, and produced extensive chromosomal damage. Finally, CD4 + and CD8 + T-cell responses were impaired upon antigen challenge. Thus, by ensuring genomic stability, Blm serves a vital role for development, maintenance, and function of T lymphocytes, suggesting a basis for the immune deficiency in Bloom's syndrome.

DISCUSSION

In this paper, we report severely disturbed development and maintenance of αβ T-lineage cells in the absence of the Bloom's syndrome helicase. While mice with a hypomorphic mutation of Blm are viable ( 30 , 34 ), a complete germ line deletion of Blm is embryonic lethal ( 4 ). Thus, to study the role of Blm in the T-cell lineage, we induced deletion of a floxed Blm allele specifically in T lymphocytes by employing three T-cell-specific Cre-expressing mouse lines ( 29 , 54 ). In particular, we used a newly generated Cre strain in which Cre recombinase is expressed from the pTa locus in a BAC transgene. The pTa gene is strongly upregulated in the newly committed DN2 thymocytes ( 43 ), and this expression pattern is fully recapitulated by BAC reporter transgenes ( 17 , 42 ). Indeed, the pTaCre transgene mediated an efficient early deletion of the floxed Blm allele already at the DN2 stage (see Fig. S2 in the supplemental material), which in turn produced a more severe phenotype than the lckCre transgene (Fig. 1 ). Of note, we found that the pTaCre transgene in neutral reporter crosses, e.g., in Cre + controls, often produces widespread Cre recombination in multiple tissues (see Fig. S1 in the supplemental material), suggesting its transient activation early in embryonic development. However, in CKO mice, these early recombinant cells appear to be counterselected, yielding a largely T-cell-specific deletion of Blm ; notably, thymic epithelial cells were nondeleted, corroborating the cell-autonomous nature of the thymic phenotype observed (see Fig. S1 and S2 in the supplemental material). Therefore, the pTaCre strain may be useful in situations where a robust early recombination in the T-cell lineage is desirable. Since Cre expression itself may sometimes cause phenotypic effects due to its nuclease activity ( 5 ), we included Blm-proficient Cre + controls in all experiments. In addition, the phenotype in the periphery of pTαCre + CKO mice (Fig. 5C ), where Cre expression is turned down in T cells, argues against a major Cre effect.

In both lckCre + and pTαCre + CKO mice, we found dramatically reduced thymic cellularities and a profound block at the β-selection checkpoint. Nevertheless, the recombination of Tcrb genes appeared normal, and indeed, the developmental block could not be rescued by a rearranged TCR transgene. Thus, our results suggest that Blm is dispensable for V(D)J recombination. Indeed, two previous studies reported a normal frequency and fidelity of VDJ coding junction formation in BS cells ( 24 , 41 ). The joining of RAG-dependent double strand breaks is mediated by the nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) pathway of DNA repair ( 49 ). Although increased levels of aberrant NHEJ-dependent double strand break repair were found in BS cells, they appear to have resulted from a compensatory shift away from the default homologous recombination pathway toward the intrinsically error-prone NHEJ pathway in the absence of BLM ( 11 ). Thus, our data support the notion that BLM is not involved in the NHEJ pathway and that the immune deficiency in BS is not secondary to the defective rearrangement of antigen receptor genes.

While Tcrb recombination and pre-TCR signaling appeared normal in Blm-deficient thymocytes, the proliferative response to the latter was strongly impaired. The proliferation of β-selected thymocytes between the DN3 and DP stages involves six to eight cell divisions and is primarily responsible for the generation of the T-cell compartment ( 40 ). Therefore, defective proliferation of Blm-deficient thymocytes at this stage is consistent with the observed severe reduction of thymocyte numbers. In addition, we documented increased cell death of Blm-deficient thymocytes, both following β-selection and later in development such as at the CD4SP stage. Similarly, mature Blm-deficient T cells were indeed generated and persisted in the quiescent state (Fig. 5C and as observed in the CD4Cre + CKO mice) yet were counterselected during homeostatic proliferation. Furthermore, Blm-deficient mature T cells were impaired in their proliferation and survival following TCR signaling in vitro (Fig. 6A and B ), resulting in impaired T-cell responses after antigen challenge (Fig. 6C ). Altogether, our data reveal an essential role for Blm in the proliferation and survival of both developing and mature T lymphocytes, with its deletion leading to defective T-cell immunity.

The p53 protein is a key player in the response to stress impinging on DNA replication and cell division, and its activation may lead to cell cycle arrest and/or apoptosis ( 49 ). In the thymus, p53 is thought to mediate the apoptosis of DN3 thymocytes that failed to receive the pre-TCR signal ( 19 , 20 ). Indeed, we found that the Trp53 deletion substantially rescued both the reduced cellularity and the developmental block caused by the absence of Blm. However, a contribution of p53-independent cell death to the observed phenotype is expected as physical and functional cooperation of the p53 and BLM proteins was shown to be necessary for normal induction of p53-dependent apoptosis ( 52 ). The incomplete rescue is likely due to the involvement of additional mechanisms such as FADD-dependent death receptor signaling in controlling thymocyte survival at this stage of development ( 39 ). On the other hand, Bcl-2 overexpression failed to rescue the block at the DN3 stage, consistent with its inability to prevent thymocyte death caused by defective pre-TCR signaling ( 20 , 32 ). Collectively, these results provide genetic evidence for a prominent yet not exclusive role of apoptosis in the impeded development of Blm-deficient thymocytes.

The defective proliferation and survival of Blm-deficient thymocytes and peripheral T cells is consistent with the known cellular functions of BLM. Indeed, BLM is thought to facilitate DNA synthesis by removing “roadblocks” for replication forks ( 1 ). Therefore, the loss of BLM appears to hamper DNA replication as observed in BS cells ( 21 ) and consequently slows down cell division. More importantly, we demonstrate a high level of genome instability in Blm-deficient T cells, which likely contributes to their defective growth. In fact, one of the central functions of BLM is the suppression of excessive and/or illegitimate homologous recombination ( 25 , 37 ). This function of BLM appears to be facilitated by its interactions with multiple proteins involved in genome maintenance, like topoisomerase IIIα or BRCA1 ( 1 , 25 , 53 ), and accounts for the hyperrecombination phenotype of BS cells. The latter is evident in the greatly increased number of sister chromatid exchanges, the hallmark of BLM deficiency ( 14 ), as observed here in cultured Blm-deficient T cells (Fig. 7A and B ). Furthermore, BS cells are known to accumulate high loads of chromosomal aberrations ( 14 ), a feature mirrored in proliferating Blm-deficient T cells in our mouse model (Fig. 7C through F ). Thus, our results indicate that Blm is a critical modulator of DNA replication and chromosome integrity in both developing and mature T lymphocytes.

The phenotype of the Blm CKO mice described here resembles that of a T-cell-specific deletion of Brca1 ( 31 ). Indeed, the latter resulted in the impaired proliferation and survival of thymocytes and mature T cells accompanied by chromosomal instability, whereas V(D)J recombination was normal. Moreover, the defective development of Brca1-deficient thymocytes was rescued on a Trp53 -null background, albeit to a larger extent than observed here ( 31 ). It was shown that BLM interacts with BRCA1 within the BRCA1-associated genome surveillance complex, a multienzyme complex containing tumor suppressors and DNA damage repair proteins ( 53 ). Notably, neither the loss of Blm nor that of Brca1 increases the incidence of T-cell malignancies (as seen in reference 31 and this report), despite the well-established tumor suppressor function of both genes ( 22 ). This is likely due to the severely reduced thymic cellularity and the proliferative capacity of Blm-deficient or Brca1-deficient DN thymocytes, which substantially limit the pool of potentially transformed cells. Indeed, an increased incidence of lymphoma development was observed in mice with a hypomorphic allele of Blm which is more permissive for T-cell development, albeit rarely at a young age ( 30 , 34 ). Furthermore, highly penetrant T-cell lymphomas arise in the absence of other tumor suppressor proteins such as p53 and Atm, neither of which cause a defect at the DN-to-DP transition ( 6 , 8 ). Altogether, our data are consistent with the function of Blm and Brca1 in a common genome surveillance pathway and underscore the role of tumor suppressor proteins in the regulation of normal lymphocyte development and function.

Humans possess five RecQ helicases, three of which (BLM, WRN, and RECQ4) are associated with genomic instability disorders (Bloom's, Werner's, and Rothmund-Thomson syndromes, respectively [ 1 ]). However, a prominent immune deficiency is observed only in BS ( 1 ), suggesting a unique function of the BLM helicase in the immune system. The results of early work in BS patients indicated a functional impairment in both B- and T-cell lineages ( 14 , 26 , 47 , 50 ). In view of our data, it appears likely that the immune deficiency in BS is based to a large extent on a T-cell defect. Indeed, decreased thymic output and reduced antigen-driven proliferation of Blm-deficient T cells undermine their ability to mount effective immune responses, as shown here for a model antigen-specific immune response. The possible functions of BLM helicase in other immune cell lineages and their contribution to the immune deficiency in BS patients remain to be elucidated in further studies.
