---
pmid: '15133502'
title: Structure and mechanism of BRCA1 BRCT domain recognition of phosphorylated
  BACH1 with implications for cancer.
authors:
- Clapperton JA
- Manke IA
- Lowery DM
- Ho T
- Haire LF
- Yaffe MB
- Smerdon SJ
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nsmb775
---

# Structure and mechanism of BRCA1 BRCT domain recognition of phosphorylated BACH1 with implications for cancer.
**Authors:** Clapperton JA, Manke IA, Lowery DM, Ho T, Haire LF, Yaffe MB, Smerdon SJ
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb775](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb775)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2004 Jun;11(6):512-8. doi: 10.1038/nsmb775. Epub 2004 May
 9.

Structure and mechanism of BRCA1 BRCT domain recognition of phosphorylated BACH1 
with implications for cancer.

Clapperton JA(1), Manke IA, Lowery DM, Ho T, Haire LF, Yaffe MB, Smerdon SJ.

Author information:
(1)National Institute for Medical Research, Division of Protein Structure, The 
Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2004 Jun;11(6):489. doi: 10.1038/nsmb0604-489.

Germline mutations in the BRCA1 tumor suppressor gene often result in a 
significant increase in susceptibility to breast and ovarian cancers. Although 
the molecular basis of their effects remains largely obscure, many mutations are 
known to target the highly conserved C-terminal BRCT repeats that function as a 
phosphoserine/phosphothreonine-binding module. We report the X-ray crystal 
structure at a resolution of 1.85 A of the BRCA1 tandem BRCT domains in complex 
with a phosphorylated peptide representing the minimal interacting region of the 
DEAH-box helicase BACH1. The structure reveals the determinants of this novel 
class of BRCA1 binding events. We show that a subset of disease-linked mutations 
act through specific disruption of phospho-dependent BRCA1 interactions rather 
than through gross structural perturbation of the tandem BRCT domains.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb775
PMID: 15133502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
