---
pmid: '11972023'
title: Requirement of Ca2+ and CaMKII for Stat1 Ser-727 phosphorylation in response
  to IFN-gamma.
authors:
- Nair JS
- DaFonseca CJ
- Tjernberg A
- Sun W
- Darnell JE Jr
- Chait BT
- Zhang JJ
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2002'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC122886
doi: 10.1073/pnas.052159099
---

# Requirement of Ca2+ and CaMKII for Stat1 Ser-727 phosphorylation in response to IFN-gamma.
**Authors:** Nair JS, DaFonseca CJ, Tjernberg A, Sun W, Darnell JE Jr, Chait BT, Zhang JJ
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.052159099](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.052159099)
**PMC:** [PMC122886](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC122886/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Apr 30;99(9):5971-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.052159099.  Epub 2002 Apr 23.

Requirement of Ca2+ and CaMKII for Stat1 Ser-727 phosphorylation in response to 
IFN-gamma.

Nair JS(1), DaFonseca CJ, Tjernberg A, Sun W, Darnell JE Jr, Chait BT, Zhang JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, 1300 
York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

In response to IFN-gamma, the latent cytoplasmic protein signal transducers and 
activators of transcription 1 (Stat1) becomes phosphorylated on Y701, dimerizes, 
and accumulates in the nucleus to activate transcription of IFN-gamma-responsive 
genes. For maximal gene activation, S727 in the transcription activation domain 
of Stat1 also is inducibly phosphorylated by IFN-gamma. We previously purified a 
group of nuclear proteins that interact specifically with the Stat1 
transcription activation domain. In this report, we identified one of them as 
the multifunctional Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent kinase (CaMK) II. We demonstrate 
that IFN-gamma mobilizes a Ca(2+) flux in cells and activates CaMKII. CaMKII can 
interact directly with Stat1 and phosphorylate Stat1 on S727 in vitro. 
Inhibition of Ca(2+) flux or CaMKII results in a lack of S727 phosphorylation 
and Stat1-dependent gene activation, suggesting in vivo phosphorylation of Stat1 
S727 by CaMKII. Thus two different cellular signaling events, IFN-gamma receptor 
occupation and Ca(2+) flux, are required for Stat1 to achieve maximal 
transcriptional activation through regulation of phosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.052159099
PMCID: PMC122886
PMID: 11972023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In response to IFN-γ, the latent cytoplasmic protein signal transducers and activators of transcription 1 (Stat1) becomes phosphorylated on Y701, dimerizes, and accumulates in the nucleus to activate transcription of IFN-γ-responsive genes. For maximal gene activation, S727 in the transcription activation domain of Stat1 also is inducibly phosphorylated by IFN-γ. We previously purified a group of nuclear proteins that interact specifically with the Stat1 transcription activation domain. In this report, we identified one of them as the multifunctional Ca 2+ /calmodulin-dependent kinase (CaMK) II. We demonstrate that IFN-γ mobilizes a Ca 2+ flux in cells and activates CaMKII. CaMKII can interact directly with Stat1 and phosphorylate Stat1 on S727 in vitro . Inhibition of Ca 2+ flux or CaMKII results in a lack of S727 phosphorylation and Stat1-dependent gene activation, suggesting in vivo phosphorylation of Stat1 S727 by CaMKII. Thus two different cellular signaling events, IFN-γ receptor occupation and Ca 2+ flux, are required for Stat1 to achieve maximal transcriptional activation through regulation of phosphorylation.

Results

We previously purified a group of nuclear proteins that interact specifically with Stat1 TAD ( 8 ). Protein identification by mass spectrometry ( 31 ) confirmed that the p55 protein in this group of Stat1 TAD-interacting proteins was CaMKIIγ (data not shown). The GST pull-down assay showed that the Stat1 TAD (residues 710–750 including the S727 residue) could interact with CaMKIIγ/δ in nuclear extracts from U3A cells (Fig. 1 A , lane 2). Furthermore, coimmunoprecipitation of whole-cell extracts from IFN-γ-treated NIH 3T3 cells showed that endogenous Stat1 and CaMKIIγ could interact in vivo (Fig. 1 B , lanes 2 and 3). Coimmunoprecipitation of whole-cell extracts from U3A cells transfected with HA-tagged Stat1α or β and CaMKIIγ showed that both full-length Stat1α and β could interact with CaMKIIγ in vivo , suggesting that not only the Stat1 TAD (missing in Stat1β) but some other site in Stat1 could also interact with CaMKIIγ (Fig. 1 C , lanes 7 and 8). To investigate which region in CaMKII can interact with Stat1, various regions of CaMKII were expressed as GST-fusion proteins according to their known structural and functional domains (ref. 21 ; Fig. 1 D ). The regulatory domain was divided further into the amino-terminal half and the carboxyl-terminal half (the calmodulin-binding domain; ref. 32 ). GST pull-down assays using these GST-fusion proteins showed that the amino-terminal half of the regulatory region (residues 273–290) of CaMKIIγ could interact with Stat1 directly (Fig. 1 D , lane 5). Equivalent amounts of GST-fusion proteins were used in the assay (data not shown). These results indicate that there is a specific interaction between Stat1 and the ubiquitous members of the CaMKII family, i.e., CaMKIIγ/δ.

To investigate any direct role CaMKII might play in the phosphorylation of S727 of Stat1, we first tested whether IFN-γ can activate CaMKII. To see whether IFN-γ can elicit a Ca 2+ flux necessary for CaMKII activation in fibroblasts, NIH 3T3 cells were treated with IFN-γ, and the intracellular concentration of Ca 2+ ([Ca 2+ ] i ) was measured. IFN-γ induced a rapid and sharp increase in [Ca 2+ ] i in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 2 A ), similar to results reported previously with other cell types ( 28 , 29 ). Autophosphorylation of CaMKII occurs in situ accompanying enzymatic activation and renders CaMKII Ca 2+ -independent, and the Ca 2+ -independent activity is used to assess activation of CaMKII ( 21 ). CaMKIIγ/δ activities in whole-cell extracts from NIH 3T3 cells were assayed by direct substrate phosphorylation using the CaMKII-selective autocamtide-3 substrate ( 33 ). As shown in Fig. 2 B , the Ca 2+ -independent activities of CaMKII were increased after treatment with IFN-γ. Cell fractionation showed that CaMKIIγ/δ was present both in the cytoplasm and the nucleus (Fig. 2 C ). The distribution patterns or amounts of CaMKII did not change significantly with IFN-γ treatment (Fig. 2 C ). As a control, the activation of the Ca 2+ -dependent PKC subfamily, PKCα/β/γ ( 20 – 22 ), was measured by Western blot with an antibody against the active form of phosphorylated PKCα/β/γ. PKC was not activated by IFN-γ treatment, but a constitutively autophosphorylated PKC was present predominantly in the cytoplasmic fraction in cells grown in serum (Fig. 2 C ) as reported previously ( 22 , 24 ). Altogether, these results indicate that IFN-γ treatment induces a Ca 2+ flux and activates CaMKII in NIH 3T3 cells.

To determine whether a Ca 2+ flux was required for the phosphorylation of Stat1 in response to IFN-γ, NIH 3T3 cells were pretreated with a Ca 2+ -chelating reagent, BAPTA-AM, which prevents an intracellular rise of [Ca 2+ ] i caused by either influx of Ca 2+ from the medium or release of Ca 2+ from intracellular stores. Phosphorylation of S727 of Stat1 was inhibited substantially by BAPTA, whereas phosphorylation of Y701 was not inhibited significantly (Fig. 3 A , compare lane 3 with lanes 2 and 4). The total amount of Stat1 protein was not affected by BAPTA treatment at 30 min (Fig. 3 A , lane 3). As reported before ( 34 ), after 3 h of treatment with IFN-γ, the Stat1 protein level was increased because of an increase in the transcription of the Stat1 gene (Fig. 3 A , compare lanes 5 and 7 with lane 1, and data not shown). BAPTA treatment prevented such an increase (Fig. 3 A , lane 6) because of inhibition of transcription of the Stat1 gene (data not shown) and probably also inhibition at the level of protein translation ( 35 ). As a control, the steady-state level of Stat3 was unchanged (Fig. 3 A ). Northern blot analyses of total RNA showed that BAPTA inhibited the IFN-γ-induced production of a Stat1-dependent gene, IFN regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1; refs. 36 and 37 ; Fig. 3 B , compare lanes 6 and 12 with lanes 2 and 8). Treatment with the solvent DMSO had no effect (Fig. 3 A , lanes 4 and 7, and B , lanes 3, 4, 9, and 10). These results indicate that a Ca 2+ flux is involved and required for INF-γ-induced serine phosphorylation of Stat1 and gene activation. To determine further which serine kinase is involved in IFN-γ-induced S727 phosphorylation, NIH 3T3 cells were treated with the following specific serine kinase inhibitors: KN93 for CaMKII, bisindolylmaleimide 1 for PKC, and SB203580 for p38 MAP kinase. Only the CaMKII inhibitor, KN93, inhibited IFN-γ-induced Stat1 S727 phosphorylation (Fig. 3 C , lane 4). KN-93 also inhibited IFN-γ-induced IRF-1 transcription (data not shown). Altogether, these results indicate that Ca 2+ -activated CaMKII but not PKC or p38 MAP kinase is involved in the IFN-γ-induced phosphorylation of Stat1 S727.

To demonstrate that Stat1 could interact with a functional CaMKII, in vitro kinase assays were performed with three substrates: a known CaMKII substrate, autocamtide-3 (Fig. 4 A ), Stat1 TAD (Fig. 4 B ), and histone H3 (Fig. 4 C ). Two types of CaMKIIs were used: the purified CaMKIIα/β from rat brain as a positive control and the CaMKIIγ/δ that was partially purified by using a GST-Stat1 TAD affinity column ( 8 ). The concentration of CaMKIIγ/δ in the eluate was estimated to be at 20 ng/μl by Western blotting (Fig. 4 A Lower , compare lanes 2 and 3) and silver staining (data not shown). The partially purified CaMKIIγ/δ showed a Ca 2+ /calmodulin-dependent activity comparable to that of the purified CaMKII-α/β from rat brain (Fig. 4 A Upper ). Stat1 TAD could be phosphorylated by both CaMKIIα/β and CaMKIIγ/δ (Fig. 4 B , lanes 4 and 8). Mutation of S727 in the Stat1 TAD resulted in a significant decrease in 32 P incorporation (Fig. 4 B , lanes 8 and 9). These results suggest that of the seven serine residues in the Stat1 TAD, S727 is the major site for CaMKII in these in vitro kinase assays. As a positive control, histone H3 also could be phosphorylated by CaMKII (Fig. 4 C , lanes 4 and 7) as suggested previously ( 38 ). Altogether, these results demonstrate that there is a functional enzyme–substrate interaction between Stat1 and CaMKII.

To demonstrate further the specific role of CaMKII in Stat1 S727 phosphorylation and transcription activation, DN mutants of CaMKII were generated: CaMKIIγ-A (see Fig. 1 D ), and the ATP-binding-deficient kinase with a K43M mutation (DN). Their effects on Stat1 S727 phosphorylation and transcription activity were tested by transient transfections in both NIH 3T3 cells and U3A cells. NIH 3T3 cells transfected with the indicated plasmids were grown first in G418-containing medium for 6 days to eliminate nontransfected cells, and G418-resistant cells then were pooled and used for the experiment shown in Fig. 5 A . Overexpression of these CaMKII mutants in NIH 3T3 cells inhibited IFN-γ-induced Stat1 S727 phosphorylation but not Y701 phosphorylation (Fig. 5 A , lanes 4 and 6). Furthermore, to demonstrate that the CaMKII mutants can inhibit IFN-γ-induced transcription of an endogenous gene, U3A cells were transiently transfected with Stat1 and the WT or the CaMKII DN mutant followed by reverse transcription–PCR analyses of total RNA. CaMKII DN inhibited IRF-1 transcription by 70%, whereas the WT CaMKII had no effect (Fig. 5 B , compare lanes 4, 6, and 8). The CaMKII WT and DN were overexpressed similarly as described for Fig. 5 A (data not shown). The gels in Fig. 5 B also were quantitated by a PhosphorImager, and the relative intensities of the IRF-1 bands normalized by those of the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) bands are shown in Fig. 5 C . Because of the nature of the CaMKII as a multienzyme complex in vivo ( 21 ), the DN effect of the CaMKII mutants would depend on the stoichiometry of the WT and mutant enzyme subunits in the complex, and therefore complete inhibition was not seen. However, consistent inhibition by ≈50% or more was observed with multiple experiments using different approaches (data not shown). Together, these results indicate that CaMKII is necessary for Stat1 S727 phosphorylation and Stat1-mediated transcription activation in response to IFN-γ.

Discussion

Our findings suggest that a Ca 2+ flux induced by the IFN-γ signaling pathway, a separate event from the tyrosine phosphorylation by Janus kinases, is required for phosphorylation of S727 in Stat1. We also found that reagents that cause [Ca 2+ ] i increase can induce phosphorylation of S727 without concurrent Y701 phosphorylation in lymphocytes (J.S.N. and J.J.Z., unpublished data). UV, lipopolysaccharide, and tumor necrosis factor have been reported to induce Stat1 S727 phosphorylation without Y701 phosphorylation ( 12 ). Together with earlier observations that Ca 2+ /calmodulin is required for IFN-γ-induced MHCII expression ( 27 ) and lipopolysaccharide-stimulated inducible NO synthase (iNOS) production ( 39 ), these results suggest that signaling events that elicit Ca 2+ flux can result in Stat1 S727 phosphorylation, which is critical for Stat1-mediated gene activation. Ca 2+ is a ubiquitous messenger involved in a multitude of cellular processes ( 16 ). The frequency and magnitude of Ca 2+ flux elicited by various signaling ligands confers specificity to the many different signaling pathways, leading to activation of different transcription activators such as NFAT, Oct-1/OAP, or NF-κB ( 18 , 19 , 40 ). Our results suggest that in NIH 3T3 cells, the Ca 2+ flux caused by IFN-γ activates the multifunctional CaMKII, which in turn phosphorylates Stat1 on S727 for maximum transcription activation.

The specific interaction between Stat1 and CaMKII also suggests the possibility that CaMKII may phosphorylate sites in chromatin to participate in chromatin remodeling near the Stat1 binding sites, which may occur in addition to the acetylation of histones by CBP/p300, also recruited by Stat1 ( 6 , 41 ). Phosphorylation on serine residue 10 of histone H3 is correlated directly with the induction of immediate-early genes such as c- jun , c- fos , and c- myc ( 42 ). Our results indicate that CaMKII can phosphorylate histone H3 directly, although it remains to be determined which serine residue in histone H3 is phosphorylated.

The search for the serine kinase responsible for phosphorylating the serine residue in STAT TADs has revealed the involvement of several kinases. The ERK MAP kinase was shown to phosphorylate Stat3 S727 ( 43 ). The p38 MAP kinase is required for UV-induced phosphorylation of Stat1 S727 ( 13 ), whereas the involvement of p38 MAP kinase in IFN-γ-induced Stat1 S727 is controversial ( 13 , 14 ). Our results suggest that CaMKII but not p38 MAP kinase or PKC is involved in IFN-γ-induced Stat1 S727 phosphorylation. Two types of CaMKII substrates have been identified: one group with an RXX S/T motif and the other group with no definitive motif except a preference of negative-charged residue at +2 position ( 25 ). The Stat1 sequence LPM S PEEF would be consistent with the second type of motif. It was reported recently that the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt pathway could be involved also in the IFN-γ-induced phosphorylation of Stat1 S727 in human tumor cell lines or mouse embryonic fibroblasts ( 15 ). PI3K has been shown to facilitate antigen-stimulated Ca 2+ flux in Jurkat T cells and mast cells ( 44 , 45 ), which could result in activation of Ca 2+ -dependent serine kinases. It seems likely that in different cellular contexts, more than one serine kinase pathway can converge on Stat1 during or after its activation through tyrosine phosphorylation on the cell surface.
