---
pmid: '17537789'
title: Wnt/beta-catenin signaling regulates nephron induction during mouse kidney
  development.
authors:
- Park JS
- Valerius MT
- McMahon AP
journal: Development
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.006155
---

# Wnt/beta-catenin signaling regulates nephron induction during mouse kidney development.
**Authors:** Park JS, Valerius MT, McMahon AP
**Journal:** Development (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.006155](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.006155)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2007 Jul;134(13):2533-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.006155. Epub 2007 May
30.

Wnt/beta-catenin signaling regulates nephron induction during mouse kidney 
development.

Park JS(1), Valerius MT, McMahon AP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, 16 Divinity 
Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Mammalian nephrons form as a result of a complex morphogenesis and patterning of 
a simple epithelial precursor, the renal vesicle. Renal vesicles are established 
from a mesenchymal progenitor population in response to inductive signals. 
Several lines of evidence support the sequential roles of two Wnt family 
members, Wnt9b and Wnt4, in renal vesicle induction. Using genetic approaches to 
specifically manipulate the activity of beta-catenin within the mesenchymal 
progenitor pool in mice, we investigated the potential role of the canonical Wnt 
pathway in these inductive events. Progenitor-cell-specific removal of 
beta-catenin activity completely blocked both the formation of renal vesicles 
and the expected molecular signature of an earlier inductive response. By 
contrast, activation of stabilized beta-catenin in the same cell population 
causes ectopic expression of mesenchymal induction markers in vitro and 
functionally replaces the requirement for Wnt9b and Wnt4 in their inductive 
roles in vivo. Thus, canonical Wnt signaling is both necessary and sufficient 
for initiating and maintaining inductive pathways mediated by Wnt9b and Wnt4. 
However, the failure of induced mesenchyme with high levels of beta-catenin 
activity to form epithelial structures suggests that modulating canonical 
signaling may be crucial for the cellular transition to the renal vesicle.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.006155
PMID: 17537789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
