---
pmid: '17482551'
title: Dendrite self-avoidance is controlled by Dscam.
authors:
- Matthews BJ
- Kim ME
- Flanagan JJ
- Hattori D
- Clemens JC
- Zipursky SL
- Grueber WB
journal: Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC12262280
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.04.013
---

# Dendrite self-avoidance is controlled by Dscam.
**Authors:** Matthews BJ, Kim ME, Flanagan JJ, Hattori D, Clemens JC, Zipursky SL, Grueber WB
**Journal:** Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2007.04.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2007.04.013)
**PMC:** [PMC12262280](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12262280/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2007 May 4;129(3):593-604. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.04.013.

Dendrite self-avoidance is controlled by Dscam.

Matthews BJ(1), Kim ME, Flanagan JJ, Hattori D, Clemens JC, Zipursky SL, Grueber 
WB.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, Columbia University, New York, NY 
10032, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2007 May 4;129(3):455-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.04.024.

Dendrites distinguish between sister branches and those of other cells. 
Self-recognition can often lead to repulsion, a process termed "self-avoidance." 
Here we demonstrate that dendrite self-avoidance in Drosophila da sensory 
neurons requires cell-recognition molecules encoded by the Dscam locus. By 
alternative splicing, Dscam encodes a vast number of cell-surface proteins of 
the immunoglobulin superfamily. We demonstrate that interactions between 
identical Dscam isoforms on the cell surface underlie self-recognition, while 
the cytoplasmic tail converts this recognition to dendrite repulsion. Sister 
dendrites expressing the same isoforms engage in homophilic repulsion. By 
contrast, Dscam diversity ensures that inappropriate repulsive interactions 
between dendrites sharing the same receptive field do not occur. The selectivity 
of Dscam-mediated cell interactions is likely to be widely important in the 
developing fly nervous system, where processes of cells must distinguish between 
self and nonself during the construction of neural circuits.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.04.013
PMID: 17482551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTIONThe development of the cerebral cortex occurs in an "inside-out" fashion (also referred to as inside-out neurogenesis), a fundamental feature of cortical development in mammalian species[1]. During cortico-genesis, pyramidal neurons in different cortical layers are generated sequentially. Early born neurons form the inner cortical layer first, while later-born neurons migrate outward to establish new layers atop the existing ones[2-4]. However, it remains largely unknown how factors produced by radial-migrating neurons contribute to the morphogenesis of the cerebral cortex. In many prevalent developmental neurological disorders, nascent pyramidal neurons successfully migrated into the cortical plate but failed to form a normal cortex, as seen in conditions such as Down syndrome[5, 6] and Autism spectrum disorder[7, 8]. Understanding how radially migrating neurons contribute to cortico-genesis is fundamental to uncover the pathology underlying these disorders.In mice, pyramidal neurons are generated in the ventricular zone (VZ) or subventricular zone (SVZ) of the embryonic dorsal telencephalon[3, 9]. Then, nascent pyramidal neurons undergo radial migration along the radial glial fiber to the top of the cortical plate[10]. The radial-migrating neuron has a leading process extending in the radial direction and a soma that follows the leading process. The soma performs saltatory nucleokinesis during the radial migration[11]. Lamellipodia assembled in the proximal end of the leading process expand the part of the leading process into a cytoplasmic dilation[12]. This newly formed dilation facilitates the rapid movement of the soma from its original position through the proximal cytoplasmic dilation of the leading process (PCDLP) to its distal end[13], known as nucleokinesis[14].Our observation showed that nascent pyramidal neurons perform radial migration to bypass the entire cortical plate and stop in the molecular layer (ML), a newly formed cortical layer[15]. Reelin in the ML decreases cell-cell adhesion between the nascent pyramidal neurons and the radial glia, facilitating their detachment[16]. Without attachment to the radial glia, the radial migration stops. Migrating neurons do not maintain the bipolar morphology but instead exhibit dynamic behavior, repetitively extending and retracting multiple highly mobile processes.Eventually, neurons reach their correct positions, lose their process, and settle down in the emerging cortical layer, at the bottom of the ML[15]. The detachment position guarantees that new neurons bypass their post-migratory predecessors and stay in the more superficial layer, making cortical genesis an “inside-out” process. However, such a process requires that migrating neurons maintain their sequential order during their radial migration. This sequential order is particularly important, given that the morphogenesis of the upper cortical layers (layer II-IV) takes significantly longer time than that of layers V and VI. In mice, neurons of upper cortical layers are generated between embryonic day (E) 14.5 and E16.5 and migrate into the cortical plate within approximately two days. However, the development of the upper cortical layers from migratory neurons continues from E19 through postnatal day 7[17]. These radial-migrating neurons accumulate beneath the border of the developing cortical plate for multiple days, awaiting morphogenesis of the new upper cortical layers. Despite recent research advancing our understanding of this process, much remains unknown about how nascent pyramidal neurons behave during the waiting period. It is uncertain whether migrating neurons follow a sequential order as they accumulate in the developing cortical plate, maintaining their positions as both leaders and followers.DSCAM is a type I transmembrane cell adhesion molecule within the immunoglobulin superfamily[18]. Its name originates from its location within the Down syndrome critical region, based on the genetic analysis of Down syndrome patients with the partial trisomy 21[19-23]. Its roles in vertebrate neural development were demonstrated through a series of studies in the mouse retina. Without DSCAM, the retinal mosaic became disorganized. Neurons cluster into clumps, and neurites fasciculate together[24-26]. A similar phenomenon occurs during the morphogenesis of the cerebral cortex. DSCAM is necessary to guide the newly arriving neurons to bypass their post-migratory leading neurons to generate a new cortical layer. Without DSCAM, the leading and following neurons may be mispositioned, occupying the same layer or clustering in the same location. The positioning errors in DSCAM mutants result in a direct reduction in cortical thickness[15]. These striking defects indicate the cell autonomy of DSCAM during cortical development, which has not been addressed yet.The fly homologue of DSCAM, Dscam, exhibits extraordinary isoform diversity of the extracellular ectodomains, mediating isoneuronal self-avoidance and tiling, preventing excessive overlap of dendrites or axons[27-32]. Mouse Dscam lacks this splice diversity but still mediates iso and heteroneuronal avoidance[33]. Evidence indicates that DSCAM acts on top of an adhesion code, in part by masking adhesion mediated by cadherins[15, 34]. The regulation of adhesion was also found in the mid-brain, where DSCAM facilitates the detachment of nascent neurons from the VZ. Without DSCAM, neurons remain attached to the VZ and are unable to initiate radial migration[35]. How DSCAM masks cell adhesion of cadherins has not been explored.Here we report that radial migration was mostly suspended in the upper cortical plate (UCP) in wild-type (WT) mice, while the nascent neurons kept migrating across the UCP in Dscam null mutants. The WT nascent neurons formed queues during radial migration, extending from the top of the cortical plate across the UCP. In the queue, the cell-type autonomy of DSCAM is required for maintaining neuronal spacing and sequential order. Neuron in the leading position inhibited the radial migration of its following neuron, temporarily halting the migration of those behind it. DSCAM is localized to the plasma membrane between adjacent neurons. The localization of DSCAM correlated with a paucity of cadherin-mediated adhesions. This is consistent with a model in which DSCAM acts to restrict the lagging neuron from expanding the proximal cytoplasmic dilation of the leading process (PCDLP) and undergoing nucleokinesis. Without DSCAM, radial-migrating neurons form cadherin-mediated adhesions and promote the expansion of PCDLP and nucleokinesis. As a result, the radial-migrating neurons directly migrate to the dorsal border of the cortical plate, disrupting their sequential order. These findings indicate that DSCAM is essential for maintaining this sequential order and for proper neuronal positioning in the “inside-out” organization of the cerebral cortex.

INTRODUCTION

The development of the cerebral cortex occurs in an "inside-out" fashion (also referred to as inside-out neurogenesis), a fundamental feature of cortical development in mammalian species[1]. During cortico-genesis, pyramidal neurons in different cortical layers are generated sequentially. Early born neurons form the inner cortical layer first, while later-born neurons migrate outward to establish new layers atop the existing ones[2-4]. However, it remains largely unknown how factors produced by radial-migrating neurons contribute to the morphogenesis of the cerebral cortex. In many prevalent developmental neurological disorders, nascent pyramidal neurons successfully migrated into the cortical plate but failed to form a normal cortex, as seen in conditions such as Down syndrome[5, 6] and Autism spectrum disorder[7, 8]. Understanding how radially migrating neurons contribute to cortico-genesis is fundamental to uncover the pathology underlying these disorders.

In mice, pyramidal neurons are generated in the ventricular zone (VZ) or subventricular zone (SVZ) of the embryonic dorsal telencephalon[3, 9]. Then, nascent pyramidal neurons undergo radial migration along the radial glial fiber to the top of the cortical plate[10]. The radial-migrating neuron has a leading process extending in the radial direction and a soma that follows the leading process. The soma performs saltatory nucleokinesis during the radial migration[11]. Lamellipodia assembled in the proximal end of the leading process expand the part of the leading process into a cytoplasmic dilation[12]. This newly formed dilation facilitates the rapid movement of the soma from its original position through the proximal cytoplasmic dilation of the leading process (PCDLP) to its distal end[13], known as nucleokinesis[14].

Our observation showed that nascent pyramidal neurons perform radial migration to bypass the entire cortical plate and stop in the molecular layer (ML), a newly formed cortical layer[15]. Reelin in the ML decreases cell-cell adhesion between the nascent pyramidal neurons and the radial glia, facilitating their detachment[16]. Without attachment to the radial glia, the radial migration stops. Migrating neurons do not maintain the bipolar morphology but instead exhibit dynamic behavior, repetitively extending and retracting multiple highly mobile processes.

Eventually, neurons reach their correct positions, lose their process, and settle down in the emerging cortical layer, at the bottom of the ML[15]. The detachment position guarantees that new neurons bypass their post-migratory predecessors and stay in the more superficial layer, making cortical genesis an “inside-out” process. However, such a process requires that migrating neurons maintain their sequential order during their radial migration. This sequential order is particularly important, given that the morphogenesis of the upper cortical layers (layer II-IV) takes significantly longer time than that of layers V and VI. In mice, neurons of upper cortical layers are generated between embryonic day (E) 14.5 and E16.5 and migrate into the cortical plate within approximately two days. However, the development of the upper cortical layers from migratory neurons continues from E19 through postnatal day 7[17]. These radial-migrating neurons accumulate beneath the border of the developing cortical plate for multiple days, awaiting morphogenesis of the new upper cortical layers. Despite recent research advancing our understanding of this process, much remains unknown about how nascent pyramidal neurons behave during the waiting period. It is uncertain whether migrating neurons follow a sequential order as they accumulate in the developing cortical plate, maintaining their positions as both leaders and followers.

DSCAM is a type I transmembrane cell adhesion molecule within the immunoglobulin superfamily[18]. Its name originates from its location within the Down syndrome critical region, based on the genetic analysis of Down syndrome patients with the partial trisomy 21[19-23]. Its roles in vertebrate neural development were demonstrated through a series of studies in the mouse retina. Without DSCAM, the retinal mosaic became disorganized. Neurons cluster into clumps, and neurites fasciculate together[24-26]. A similar phenomenon occurs during the morphogenesis of the cerebral cortex. DSCAM is necessary to guide the newly arriving neurons to bypass their post-migratory leading neurons to generate a new cortical layer. Without DSCAM, the leading and following neurons may be mispositioned, occupying the same layer or clustering in the same location. The positioning errors in DSCAM mutants result in a direct reduction in cortical thickness[15]. These striking defects indicate the cell autonomy of DSCAM during cortical development, which has not been addressed yet.

The fly homologue of DSCAM, Dscam, exhibits extraordinary isoform diversity of the extracellular ectodomains, mediating isoneuronal self-avoidance and tiling, preventing excessive overlap of dendrites or axons[27-32]. Mouse Dscam lacks this splice diversity but still mediates iso and heteroneuronal avoidance[33]. Evidence indicates that DSCAM acts on top of an adhesion code, in part by masking adhesion mediated by cadherins[15, 34]. The regulation of adhesion was also found in the mid-brain, where DSCAM facilitates the detachment of nascent neurons from the VZ. Without DSCAM, neurons remain attached to the VZ and are unable to initiate radial migration[35]. How DSCAM masks cell adhesion of cadherins has not been explored.

Here we report that radial migration was mostly suspended in the upper cortical plate (UCP) in wild-type (WT) mice, while the nascent neurons kept migrating across the UCP in Dscam null mutants. The WT nascent neurons formed queues during radial migration, extending from the top of the cortical plate across the UCP. In the queue, the cell-type autonomy of DSCAM is required for maintaining neuronal spacing and sequential order. Neuron in the leading position inhibited the radial migration of its following neuron, temporarily halting the migration of those behind it. DSCAM is localized to the plasma membrane between adjacent neurons. The localization of DSCAM correlated with a paucity of cadherin-mediated adhesions. This is consistent with a model in which DSCAM acts to restrict the lagging neuron from expanding the proximal cytoplasmic dilation of the leading process (PCDLP) and undergoing nucleokinesis. Without DSCAM, radial-migrating neurons form cadherin-mediated adhesions and promote the expansion of PCDLP and nucleokinesis. As a result, the radial-migrating neurons directly migrate to the dorsal border of the cortical plate, disrupting their sequential order. These findings indicate that DSCAM is essential for maintaining this sequential order and for proper neuronal positioning in the “inside-out” organization of the cerebral cortex.

RESULTSDSCAM is required for the even distribution of radial-migrating neurons in the UCP.To better understand neuronal behavior during radial migration, we labeled migrating neurons using in-utero electroporation (IUE). Vectors encoding fluorescent proteins were injected into the lateral ventricle of E14.5 embryos of WT or Dscam2j/2j (a frameshift null-allele mutation of Dscam[26], hereafter referred to as Dscam−/−) time-pregnant dams, respectively. Electroporation was carried out to transfect neural progenitor cells (NPCs) in the ventricular zone of the dorsal telencephalon. At E18.5, the offspring of the dorsal NPCs had proliferated and differentiated into nascent neurons. Many of these neurons had accumulated in the upper half of the cortical plate (UCP) through radial migration, while the rest remained in the lower half of the cortical plate (LCP). As expected, in both WT and Dscam−/−, the radial-migrating neurons exhibited the typical bipolar morphology, characterized by a leading process, cell body, and trailing process (Figure 1A, B, D, and E). In WT, the labeled migrating neurons distribute evenly across the UCP (Figure 1A, WT). The detailed images (Figure 1B) show that multiple neurons (arrowheads) migrate along the same axis in WT. These neurons' cell bodies are spaced apart from each other to form an even distribution. In the Dscam−/− neocortex, the migrating neurons accumulated below the border of the CP (Figure 1A, Dscam−/−). The detailed image shows the migrating neurons compressed and overlapping (Figure 1B, Dscam−/−). To quantify distribution of migrating neurons in the UCP, we measured the distance of individual neurons to the dorsal border of the CP (Figure 1C). These data show that neurons distribute in a wide area under the border of the CP in the WT, with an average distance of −52.1±30.2 μm, while the neurons accumulate in a narrower space below the dorsal border of CP in the Dscam−/− littermates, with an average distance of −36.0±26.2 μm (Figure 1C).DSCAM is required to synchronize radial migration in the UCP.Time-lapse imaging was performed to monitor the radial migration behavior of E18.5 WT and Dscam−/− neurons, respectively, with radially migrating neurons labeled with IUE at E14.5. In WT neocortex, radial migration is rapid in LCP but dramatically slower as the nascent neuron reaches the UCP (Figure 1D, lower panel; 1-4 hours shows the fast migration; 4-11 hours shows the suspended migration). In the UCP, radial migration was mostly suspended (Figure 1D, upper panel). The average speed of radial migration in LCP was 12.0±4.0 μm/hour, while in UCP decreased to 3.4±1.6 μm/hour (Figure 1G). Tracing the radial migration, we found that high-speed radial migration was halted abruptly at 137.7±24.4 μm below the dorsal border of the CP, near the base of the UCP (Figure 1D lower panel, 1F). In the Dscam−/− neocortex, the neurons migrated rapidly across both LCP and UCP, with no noticeable reduction in speed (Figure 1E, 1F). In Dscam−/−, the speed of migration was 13.0±8.9 μm/hour in the LCP, and 9.7±5.5 μm/hour in the UCP. The radial migration speed in Dscam−/− UCP is comparable to that in Dscam−/− LCP and WT LCP (Figure 1G). Radial migration speed in the UCP is much slower in WT mice compared to Dscam−/−.Among the radial-migrating neurons in the UCP, the leading neurons appear to set the pace for the trailing neurons (Figure 1D upper panel). The leading neuron (green arrowheads) moved 14.9 μm upward (Figure 1D upper panel, 1~2 hour). Then, the following neuron (magenta arrowheads) immediately moved 14.3 μm upward to occupy the space (Figure 1D upper panel, 2~4 hours). As a result, the leading neurons and following neurons maintained their sequential order. Moreover, they kept their distance during their radial migration in the UCP. This observation demonstrates a synchronized radial migration in the UCP. In a Dscam−/− background, migrating neurons fail to maintain their synchronized movement (Figure 1E). Time-lapse recordings revealed that the following neurons (green arrowheads) bypassed one leading neuron (magenta arrowheads, Figure 1E, 2-4 hours) and then another (blue arrowheads, Figure 1E, 4-8 hours). The following neuron (magenta) also bypassed the leading neurons later (blue arrowheads, Figure 1E, 9-12 hours). Finally, all these neurons ceased migration just below the dorsal border of the CP (Figure 1E, 5-13 hours). This data suggests the crucial role of DSCAM in maintaining the synchronized radial migration with fixed sequential order and distance (Figure 1I).We examined the synchronized radial migration within a neuronal pair consisting of a leading and a trailing migrating neuron. In WT, only 9.7±5.2% of the following neurons bypassed their leading neurons during the time-lapse observation. In Dscam−/−, 50.4±8.9% of the following neurons bypassed the leading neurons (Figure 1H). This finding supports a model in which synchronized migration is maintained during radial migration in the UCP. DSCAM is required to maintain the order and the even distribution of migrating neurons within the UCP (Figure 1I; the diagram shows the different radial migrations in WT and Dscam−/−, respectively).Dscam is expressed in queues across the UCPOur previous data showed that Dscam expression increased dramatically in the UCP at E19. Moreover, the increased Dscam expression was concentrated in radial-migrating neurons. We wondered whether the high level of Dscam expression correlates with the synchronized radial migration. In-situ hybridization (ISH) in the E19 cortical plate shows that the Dscam expression covers the UCP with a width of 158.7±28.2 μm below the dorsal boundary of the CP (Figure 2A). The Dscam-positive signal labels queues of individual cells, in locations coincident with the reports in Figure 1, starting at the dorsal border of the CP and extending across the UCP (Figure 2A and 2C, green square brackets labeled). At E19, the average length of Dscam-expressing cells was 148.2±26.5 μm (Figure 2B). In contrast, the Dscam signal in the DSCAM−/− brain was absent (Figure 2A, DSCAM−/−). Next, we aimed to determine whether the cells expressing Dscam are radial-migrating neurons. To address this question, IUE was performed in E14.5 embryos to label migrating neurons with RFP. By E19, the RFP-labeled neurons had entered the UCP. Cells were labeled by ISH to monitor Dscam mRNA distribution. We found that all the radial migratory neurons (red, highlighted with green arrowheads) also expressed Dscam (Figure 2C, green arrowheads). This indicates that IUE-labeled migrating neurons express Dscam as they begin to queue. The queue structure, Dscam expression, and lack of queuing in the DSCAM−/− brain suggest that the DSCAM-DSCAM interactions may inhibit the radial migration of the following neuron. This mechanism may contribute to the synchronized radial migrations within the UCP.DSCAM is necessary to maintain the sequential order of neurons during radial migration.Based on the Dscam expression pattern revealed by ISH and its known role in regulating cell spacing and axon guidance,[24, 33] we speculated that DSCAM interaction might function to maintain the queue of radial migration. Therefore, we predicted that when a fast-migrating neuron from LCP is approaching a slow-migrating neuron suspended at the bottom of the UCP, the fast radial migration will slow and not progress past the leading neuron. The time-lapse observation focused on the bottom of the UCP, ~150 μm below the dorsal border of the CP. As expected, the new-coming neurons were found migrating swiftly from the LCP (Figure 3A WT, magenta arrowheads) and approached the neurons suspended at the bottom of the UCP (Figure 3A WT, green arrowheads, 5:00-8:00). At this point, the fast-migrating neurons halted rapid progress (Figure 3A, WT 8:00-12:00), while in the Dscam−/− brain, the fast-migrating neurons (magenta arrowheads) approached and bypassed the leading neurons (Figure 3A, Dscam−/− 1:00-3:30, green arrowheads). In WT, most trailing neurons halted (85.9±7.6%) after reaching the leading neurons. In the Dscam−/− brains, the number decreased to 27.6±24.0% (Figure 3B). The relative positions between the leading neurons and the following neurons after their encounter were analyzed. On average, the following neurons were localized to a narrow range of 7.0±6.1 μm below the base of the leading neurons in WT (Figure 3C). This suggests that the following neurons pause when encountering the leading neurons, remaining in a consistent relative position. In Dscam−/−, the trailing neurons continued to migrate after encountering the leading neurons, allowing them to move to positions both ahead of and behind the leading neurons. The relative positions are highly variable, with the following neurons at an average of 9.6±13.7 μm above the leading neurons (Figure 3C). A diagram illustrates the structure of the DSCAM queue across the UCP (Figure 3D). The migrating neurons in the DSCAM queue block one by one (Green circles in Figure 3D) from the dorsal border of the cortical plate to the bottom (Left row, WT). The leading neurons create space for the following neurons (the second left row in WT), allowing them to migrate upwards and thus creating space for the next neuron, though the leading neuron remains at the top in WT. Without DSCAM, the radial-migrating neurons lost the blockage from the leading position and migrated consistently to the border of the CP (Figure 3D, Dscam−/−). Nevertheless, these results indicate that DSCAM is required to restrict the radial migration of following neurons, thereby forming the queue of radial migration.The cell-type autonomy of DSCAM in radial migrationDSCAM can act as a homophilic cell adhesion molecule[33], requiring neurons trans interaction to block cadherin-mediated adhesion[34]. However, DSCAM can also interact with a number of heterologous ligands,[36] and it remains unclear whether maintaining the order of migratory neurons depends on DSCAM expression in both the leading and following neurons. To address this question, the DscamF/+ mice (carrying the loxP sites which can flank the exon of transmembrane domain [37]) were bred to produce DscamF/+ or DscamF/F embryos. IUE was performed on E14.5 embryos to label the NPCs and simultaneously knock out DSCAM using a Cre-expressing vector. Cre expression led to the knockout of one or both copies of Dscam, generating Dscam-heterozygous or Dscam-knockout NPCs. Consequently, all descendant neurons derived from these NPCs became Dscam heterozygous or knockout within a background of otherwise normal DSCAM expression. The E19.5 embryonic brains were collected 5 days later, and neuronal distribution in these brains was analyzed. In DscamF/+, the migrating neurons (GFP) distribute evenly across the UCP, while in DscamF/F, these neurons (GFP, knockout) accumulate in a narrower range along the dorsal border of the cortical plate (Figure 4A). Heterozygous migrating neurons evenly disperse in the UCP, with an average distance of −54.0±32.8 μm below the border of the CP. Knockout migrating neurons disperse in a narrow range, more accumulated (Figure 4A), with an average distance of −36.2±27.0 μm below the border of the CP (Figure 4C). This indicates that, in a normal DSCAM environment where most of the radial migrating neurons express DSCAM, WT neurons failed to block the DSCAM knockout neurons’ radial migration. The accumulation of Dscam knockout neurons can be rescued by co-transfection of the DSCAM overexpression vector during IUE (Figure 4B). Dscam knockout neurons with DSCAM overexpression disperse evenly in the UCP, indicating the cell-autonomy of DSCAM in the distribution of migrating neurons. The average distance is −64.1±34.8 μm below the border of the cortical plate (Figure 4C).We also tested whether Dscam null neurons can block the radial migration of a DSCAM-positive neuron to address the possibility that DSCAM was interacting with a heterologous ligand. DSCAM-overexpressing vector was in-utero injected and transfected into NPCs of Dscam−/− mice and their WT siblings through IUE to test if DSCAM overexpression can recover the blockage of radial migration in a background of otherwise Dscam-null cortical plate (Figure 4D). The E19.5 embryonic brains were collected 5 days after the IUE transfection to analyze the neuronal distribution in these brains. In WT, the migrating neurons distribute evenly in the UCP, with an average distance of 70.9±35.3 μm to the dorsal border of CP (Figure 4E). In a Dscam−/− background, the DSCAM overexpression neurons accumulate under the border of the cortical plate and distribute in a narrower area, with 50.9±33.3 μm on average to the dorsal border of the cortical plate (Figures 4D and 4E). This indicates that DSCAM-positive neurons cannot be blocked by DSCAM-null neurons in the developing cortical plate, indicating that the DSCAM from leading directions is necessary for blocking those following neurons. We also found that DSCAM expression within the migrating train of neurons in an otherwise Dscam−/− background is sufficient to inhibit the trailing neurons of the transfected train. These results demonstrate that DSCAM is required from both the leading neuron and the following neuron to halt the radial migration of the following neurons and that its expression is sufficient within a train of migrating neurons to inhibit migration. In migrating neurons, DSCAM functions in a cell-type autonomous manner, that is acting between neurons of the migrating train, consistent with homotypic binding between migrating neurons, in order to maintain the order between the leading neuron and the following neuron, thereby ensuring the queue of radial-migrating neurons.F-actin accumulates in the Dscam null brain and is correlated with the persistence of cadherin-mediated adhesion.Time-lapse imaging revealed that right after the leading neuron moved up and made a space for the following neurons, the following neuron promptly extended its leading process, thickening its proximal end to form the proximal cytoplasmic dilation of the leading process (PCDLP, [13]) (Figure 1D, upper panel 1:00-2:00, the square brackets). The extension of PCDLP is the necessary step to trigger the saltatory nucleokinesis of the radial migration (Figure 1D, upper panel 1:00-4:00, the square brackets). This phenomenon indicates that the leading neurons directly suppress the expansion of PCDLP, thereby preventing saltatory nucleokinesis. To validate this, we studied the PCDLP of the migratory neurons within UCP and LCP, respectively. We found that 14.7±7.5% of migrating neurons in WT UCP have PCDLP, significantly lower than the 94.6±3.1% in the Dscam−/− UCP, 82.8±8.4% in the WT LCP, and 92.6±5.9% in the Dscam−/− LCP (Figure 5D). Most migrating neurons in the WT UCP lack PCDLP, supporting the notion that the leading neurons may restrict the radial migration of following neurons by inhibiting the expansion of their PCDLP.F-actin assembly leads to the protrusion of the lamellipodia at the proximal end of the leading process, resulting in the expansion of the PCDLP[13]. Therefore, F-actin is a key feature that represents nucleokinesis activity. To determine whether F-actin is decreased in UCP, we labeled the F-actin in the E18.5 cortical plate using phalloidin. The F-actin intensity was normalized to the ML F-actin intensity, which remained consistent across all samples (Figure 5A). The relative signal strength was calculated as: (F-actin intensity / F-actin intensity in ML) %. F-actin relative strength in WT UCP is 42.6±3.9%, significantly lower than 58.2±7.2% in the Dscam−/− UCP (Figure 5B). While the F-actin relative signal is comparable in WT LCP (53.7±5.6%), Dscam−/− UCP (58.2±7.2%), and Dscam−/− LCP (51.8±11.8%) (Figure 5B). High-magnification images were taken, and radial-migrating neurons were examined individually to directly observe the F-actin in individual neurons. We found that the radial-migrating neurons contain a low level of F-actin in the WT UCP (Figure 5C). In Dscam−/− UCP, F-actin is highly assembled throughout the soma and the leading process (Figure 5C’). 13.7±7.1% of radial-migrating neurons in WT UCP contain the F-actin signal in the leading process. While F-actin can be detected in 96.7±3.0% of radial migrating neurons in Dscam−/− UCP. The percentage is comparable in Dscam−/− UCP, WT LCP (90.4±9.7%), and Dscam−/− LCP (95.4±1.4%) (Figure 5E). These observations confirmed that, in WT UCP, the level of F-actin in the proximal end of the leading process and the soma is low. The low F-actin level suggests the loss of lamellipodia in the proximal end of the leading process. This supports the idea that the expansion of PCDLP is blocked by the leading neuron and, thereafter, the saltatory nucleokinesis. This prompted us to wonder how the DSCAM interaction between the leading neuron and the following neuron dramatically reduces F-actin assembly in the following neuron.Cadherin adhesion facilitates and maintains the F-actin assembly during lamellipodia protrusion[38]. Cadherin adhesion stabilizes the extended lamellipodia and inhibits the retrograde flow of the F-actin, ensuring directed and persistent protrusion[38, 39]. The cadherin adhesion of Cdh2[15], Cdh3, and Cdh6[34] is blocked by DSCAM during the morphogenesis of retinal mosaic and cerebral cortex, thereby modulating the cellular distribution. Hence, DSCAM is thought to function as “masking” cadherin adhesion in general.N-cadherin (Cdh2) is essential for proper radial migration[40], as its adhesion around neurons promotes F-actin assembly beneath the adhesion sites[38]. This makes N-cadherin an ideal candidate to study the potential mechanistic connection between DSCAM and cadherin adhesion. Immunohistochemistry of N-cadherin was performed on the E19 brain slice to evaluate the neuronal adhesion in the UCP. The results showed that the N-cadherin in the WT UCP was diffused and smeared. In contrast, N-cadherin exhibited strong, well-defined adhesive puncta in the Dscam−/− UCP, indicating robust cadherin-mediated adhesion without DSCAM (Figure 5F). The enlarged images revealed that N-cadherin adhesion (green puncta) is present on the cell surface across the entire cell body and the leading process in Dscam−/−, forming adhesions with other neurons (Figure 5G), with 1.01±0.06 puncta per μm on the edge of the soma and leading process. In WT, the N-cadherin puncta density decreases to 0.19±0.05 puncta per μm on the edge of soma and leading process (Figure 5H). These results support that DSCAM is required for blocking cadherin-mediated adhesion among migrating neurons. Without N-cadherin adhesion, F-actin disassembles in the following neuron to dismantle its nucleokinesis in the WT UCP.Gaps and limited cadherin adhesion among wild-type neurons compared to Dscam−/− neuronsHow does DSCAM block the cadherin-mediated adhesion? To answer that question, N-cadherin-BFP was transfected into HeLa cells, either alone or co-transfected with DSCAM-mNeonGreen (Figure 6A, schematic). Without DSCAM, N-cadherin from neighboring HeLa cells formed the adhesive puncta (Figure 6A, w/o DSCAM). In the presence of DSCAM, N-cadherin from neighboring HeLa cells was separated by a narrow cleft of 1.36±0.56 μm in width (Figure 6A, w/DSCAM). Although the N-cadherin existed on both sides of the cleft and was positioned on the processes extending out, they failed to contact each other across the cleft (Figure 6A), indicating that DSCAM doesn’t expel the N-cadherin from the cell surface and doesn’t affect the extension of the N-cadherin process in the cleft. Instead, DSCAM may block the N-cadherin processes from encountering across the cleft. In fact, we noticed that the cleft between two N-cadherin+ HeLa cells was filled with thin fibers of DSCAM-mNeonGreen. The DSCAM fibers are dramatically thinner, longer, and denser than those of the N-cadherin process (Figure 6A, green). These features indicate that the DSCAM fibers touch the other cell far before the N-cadherin processes make contact. It is possible that the dense DSCAM fibers may interrupt the interaction of the N-cadherin processes from forming the N-cadherin adhesion.DSCAM fiber fills the space between migrating neurons and separates the neuronsThe next question we addressed is whether DSCAM also generates gaps between migrating neurons. In UCP, the neurons were isolated from each other (Figure 6B, WT). Each neuron contacted fewer than one other cell, 0.65±0.25 on average (Figure 6D, WT). The clefts separating the adjacent neurons are 0.64±0.27μm on average (Figure 6E). In the Dscam−/− UCP, the neurons were squeezed together (Figure 6B and 6D, Dscam−/−). Each neuron directly contacted about 2.98±0.19 other neurons (Figure 6D). The clefts among neurons narrowed to ~0.04±0.12μm in width (Figure 6E). Does this mean that DSCAM separates the radial-migrating neurons from each other?To answer the question, DSCAM-mNeonGreen was over-expressed in the migratory neurons with IUE, so that DSCAM could be observed in vivo. We found that the DSCAM signal (Green) encircles the cell body (Red) of the migrating neurons (Figure 6C, labeled with 0). Clefts between neurons were stuffed by DSCAM, and the labeled cell body (cell 0) was separated from the other cells (Figure 6C, cells 1, 2, and 3). The dashed lines labeling the bottom edge of the leading neuron and the front edge of the following neuron (Figure 6C, WT) showed that DSCAM fills the cleft in between and separates them (Figure 6C and 6F, WT). Comparable to the observation in the HeLa cell, DSCAM is located on the dense and thin fibers extended from the cell body of the migrating neuron (Figure 6C). Surprisingly, in Dscam−/−, the DSCAM signal is inside the migrating neurons (Figure 6C, Dscam−/−, neuron 0). The neurons (neuron 0 and neurons 1, 2, and 3) in Dscam−/− UCP are not separated (Figure 6C and 6F, Dscam−/−). These results indicate that DSCAM is required to generate clefts among neurons to separate them in the UCP (Figures 6C and 6F).DSCAM blocks the cadherin-mediated adhesion among radial-migrating neurons.If DSCAM directly separates adjacent neurons, cadherin-mediated adhesion between these neurons is likely to be suppressed. As a result, N-cadherin overexpression should not induce additional adhesion in the WT CP. However, if N-cadherin is over-expressed in the Dscam−/− CP, additional adhesion would be expected. During radial migration, the clustering of migratory neurons should be expected in the Dscam−/− CP. To confirm the DSCAM’s role in suppressing cell-cell adhesion, IUE was done on E14.5 by over-expressing N-cadherin-GFP in NPCs along the dorsal telencephalon. The distribution of migratory neurons in E18.5 was analyzed in both WT and Dscam−/− embryonic UCPs. In WT, radial-migrating neurons with N-cadherin overexpression did not form a cluster in the UCP, and only 11±6% of migratory neurons contacted the other migratory neurons (Figure 7A and 7B). In contrast, in Dscam−/−, migratory neurons with N-cadherin overexpression formed clusters, with approximately 53±5% of migratory neurons found in each cluster (Figure 7A and 7B). These results indicate that DSCAM is dominant in suppressing the cadherin-mediated adhesion in the UCP.

DSCAM is required for the even distribution of radial-migrating neurons in the UCP.To better understand neuronal behavior during radial migration, we labeled migrating neurons using in-utero electroporation (IUE). Vectors encoding fluorescent proteins were injected into the lateral ventricle of E14.5 embryos of WT or Dscam2j/2j (a frameshift null-allele mutation of Dscam[26], hereafter referred to as Dscam−/−) time-pregnant dams, respectively. Electroporation was carried out to transfect neural progenitor cells (NPCs) in the ventricular zone of the dorsal telencephalon. At E18.5, the offspring of the dorsal NPCs had proliferated and differentiated into nascent neurons. Many of these neurons had accumulated in the upper half of the cortical plate (UCP) through radial migration, while the rest remained in the lower half of the cortical plate (LCP). As expected, in both WT and Dscam−/−, the radial-migrating neurons exhibited the typical bipolar morphology, characterized by a leading process, cell body, and trailing process (Figure 1A, B, D, and E). In WT, the labeled migrating neurons distribute evenly across the UCP (Figure 1A, WT). The detailed images (Figure 1B) show that multiple neurons (arrowheads) migrate along the same axis in WT. These neurons' cell bodies are spaced apart from each other to form an even distribution. In the Dscam−/− neocortex, the migrating neurons accumulated below the border of the CP (Figure 1A, Dscam−/−). The detailed image shows the migrating neurons compressed and overlapping (Figure 1B, Dscam−/−). To quantify distribution of migrating neurons in the UCP, we measured the distance of individual neurons to the dorsal border of the CP (Figure 1C). These data show that neurons distribute in a wide area under the border of the CP in the WT, with an average distance of −52.1±30.2 μm, while the neurons accumulate in a narrower space below the dorsal border of CP in the Dscam−/− littermates, with an average distance of −36.0±26.2 μm (Figure 1C).

DSCAM is required for the even distribution of radial-migrating neurons in the UCP.

To better understand neuronal behavior during radial migration, we labeled migrating neurons using in-utero electroporation (IUE). Vectors encoding fluorescent proteins were injected into the lateral ventricle of E14.5 embryos of WT or Dscam2j/2j (a frameshift null-allele mutation of Dscam[26], hereafter referred to as Dscam−/−) time-pregnant dams, respectively. Electroporation was carried out to transfect neural progenitor cells (NPCs) in the ventricular zone of the dorsal telencephalon. At E18.5, the offspring of the dorsal NPCs had proliferated and differentiated into nascent neurons. Many of these neurons had accumulated in the upper half of the cortical plate (UCP) through radial migration, while the rest remained in the lower half of the cortical plate (LCP). As expected, in both WT and Dscam−/−, the radial-migrating neurons exhibited the typical bipolar morphology, characterized by a leading process, cell body, and trailing process (Figure 1A, B, D, and E). In WT, the labeled migrating neurons distribute evenly across the UCP (Figure 1A, WT). The detailed images (Figure 1B) show that multiple neurons (arrowheads) migrate along the same axis in WT. These neurons' cell bodies are spaced apart from each other to form an even distribution. In the Dscam−/− neocortex, the migrating neurons accumulated below the border of the CP (Figure 1A, Dscam−/−). The detailed image shows the migrating neurons compressed and overlapping (Figure 1B, Dscam−/−). To quantify distribution of migrating neurons in the UCP, we measured the distance of individual neurons to the dorsal border of the CP (Figure 1C). These data show that neurons distribute in a wide area under the border of the CP in the WT, with an average distance of −52.1±30.2 μm, while the neurons accumulate in a narrower space below the dorsal border of CP in the Dscam−/− littermates, with an average distance of −36.0±26.2 μm (Figure 1C).

DSCAM is required to synchronize radial migration in the UCP.Time-lapse imaging was performed to monitor the radial migration behavior of E18.5 WT and Dscam−/− neurons, respectively, with radially migrating neurons labeled with IUE at E14.5. In WT neocortex, radial migration is rapid in LCP but dramatically slower as the nascent neuron reaches the UCP (Figure 1D, lower panel; 1-4 hours shows the fast migration; 4-11 hours shows the suspended migration). In the UCP, radial migration was mostly suspended (Figure 1D, upper panel). The average speed of radial migration in LCP was 12.0±4.0 μm/hour, while in UCP decreased to 3.4±1.6 μm/hour (Figure 1G). Tracing the radial migration, we found that high-speed radial migration was halted abruptly at 137.7±24.4 μm below the dorsal border of the CP, near the base of the UCP (Figure 1D lower panel, 1F). In the Dscam−/− neocortex, the neurons migrated rapidly across both LCP and UCP, with no noticeable reduction in speed (Figure 1E, 1F). In Dscam−/−, the speed of migration was 13.0±8.9 μm/hour in the LCP, and 9.7±5.5 μm/hour in the UCP. The radial migration speed in Dscam−/− UCP is comparable to that in Dscam−/− LCP and WT LCP (Figure 1G). Radial migration speed in the UCP is much slower in WT mice compared to Dscam−/−.Among the radial-migrating neurons in the UCP, the leading neurons appear to set the pace for the trailing neurons (Figure 1D upper panel). The leading neuron (green arrowheads) moved 14.9 μm upward (Figure 1D upper panel, 1~2 hour). Then, the following neuron (magenta arrowheads) immediately moved 14.3 μm upward to occupy the space (Figure 1D upper panel, 2~4 hours). As a result, the leading neurons and following neurons maintained their sequential order. Moreover, they kept their distance during their radial migration in the UCP. This observation demonstrates a synchronized radial migration in the UCP. In a Dscam−/− background, migrating neurons fail to maintain their synchronized movement (Figure 1E). Time-lapse recordings revealed that the following neurons (green arrowheads) bypassed one leading neuron (magenta arrowheads, Figure 1E, 2-4 hours) and then another (blue arrowheads, Figure 1E, 4-8 hours). The following neuron (magenta) also bypassed the leading neurons later (blue arrowheads, Figure 1E, 9-12 hours). Finally, all these neurons ceased migration just below the dorsal border of the CP (Figure 1E, 5-13 hours). This data suggests the crucial role of DSCAM in maintaining the synchronized radial migration with fixed sequential order and distance (Figure 1I).We examined the synchronized radial migration within a neuronal pair consisting of a leading and a trailing migrating neuron. In WT, only 9.7±5.2% of the following neurons bypassed their leading neurons during the time-lapse observation. In Dscam−/−, 50.4±8.9% of the following neurons bypassed the leading neurons (Figure 1H). This finding supports a model in which synchronized migration is maintained during radial migration in the UCP. DSCAM is required to maintain the order and the even distribution of migrating neurons within the UCP (Figure 1I; the diagram shows the different radial migrations in WT and Dscam−/−, respectively).

DSCAM is required to synchronize radial migration in the UCP.

Time-lapse imaging was performed to monitor the radial migration behavior of E18.5 WT and Dscam−/− neurons, respectively, with radially migrating neurons labeled with IUE at E14.5. In WT neocortex, radial migration is rapid in LCP but dramatically slower as the nascent neuron reaches the UCP (Figure 1D, lower panel; 1-4 hours shows the fast migration; 4-11 hours shows the suspended migration). In the UCP, radial migration was mostly suspended (Figure 1D, upper panel). The average speed of radial migration in LCP was 12.0±4.0 μm/hour, while in UCP decreased to 3.4±1.6 μm/hour (Figure 1G). Tracing the radial migration, we found that high-speed radial migration was halted abruptly at 137.7±24.4 μm below the dorsal border of the CP, near the base of the UCP (Figure 1D lower panel, 1F). In the Dscam−/− neocortex, the neurons migrated rapidly across both LCP and UCP, with no noticeable reduction in speed (Figure 1E, 1F). In Dscam−/−, the speed of migration was 13.0±8.9 μm/hour in the LCP, and 9.7±5.5 μm/hour in the UCP. The radial migration speed in Dscam−/− UCP is comparable to that in Dscam−/− LCP and WT LCP (Figure 1G). Radial migration speed in the UCP is much slower in WT mice compared to Dscam−/−.

Among the radial-migrating neurons in the UCP, the leading neurons appear to set the pace for the trailing neurons (Figure 1D upper panel). The leading neuron (green arrowheads) moved 14.9 μm upward (Figure 1D upper panel, 1~2 hour). Then, the following neuron (magenta arrowheads) immediately moved 14.3 μm upward to occupy the space (Figure 1D upper panel, 2~4 hours). As a result, the leading neurons and following neurons maintained their sequential order. Moreover, they kept their distance during their radial migration in the UCP. This observation demonstrates a synchronized radial migration in the UCP. In a Dscam−/− background, migrating neurons fail to maintain their synchronized movement (Figure 1E). Time-lapse recordings revealed that the following neurons (green arrowheads) bypassed one leading neuron (magenta arrowheads, Figure 1E, 2-4 hours) and then another (blue arrowheads, Figure 1E, 4-8 hours). The following neuron (magenta) also bypassed the leading neurons later (blue arrowheads, Figure 1E, 9-12 hours). Finally, all these neurons ceased migration just below the dorsal border of the CP (Figure 1E, 5-13 hours). This data suggests the crucial role of DSCAM in maintaining the synchronized radial migration with fixed sequential order and distance (Figure 1I).

We examined the synchronized radial migration within a neuronal pair consisting of a leading and a trailing migrating neuron. In WT, only 9.7±5.2% of the following neurons bypassed their leading neurons during the time-lapse observation. In Dscam−/−, 50.4±8.9% of the following neurons bypassed the leading neurons (Figure 1H). This finding supports a model in which synchronized migration is maintained during radial migration in the UCP. DSCAM is required to maintain the order and the even distribution of migrating neurons within the UCP (Figure 1I; the diagram shows the different radial migrations in WT and Dscam−/−, respectively).

Dscam is expressed in queues across the UCPOur previous data showed that Dscam expression increased dramatically in the UCP at E19. Moreover, the increased Dscam expression was concentrated in radial-migrating neurons. We wondered whether the high level of Dscam expression correlates with the synchronized radial migration. In-situ hybridization (ISH) in the E19 cortical plate shows that the Dscam expression covers the UCP with a width of 158.7±28.2 μm below the dorsal boundary of the CP (Figure 2A). The Dscam-positive signal labels queues of individual cells, in locations coincident with the reports in Figure 1, starting at the dorsal border of the CP and extending across the UCP (Figure 2A and 2C, green square brackets labeled). At E19, the average length of Dscam-expressing cells was 148.2±26.5 μm (Figure 2B). In contrast, the Dscam signal in the DSCAM−/− brain was absent (Figure 2A, DSCAM−/−). Next, we aimed to determine whether the cells expressing Dscam are radial-migrating neurons. To address this question, IUE was performed in E14.5 embryos to label migrating neurons with RFP. By E19, the RFP-labeled neurons had entered the UCP. Cells were labeled by ISH to monitor Dscam mRNA distribution. We found that all the radial migratory neurons (red, highlighted with green arrowheads) also expressed Dscam (Figure 2C, green arrowheads). This indicates that IUE-labeled migrating neurons express Dscam as they begin to queue. The queue structure, Dscam expression, and lack of queuing in the DSCAM−/− brain suggest that the DSCAM-DSCAM interactions may inhibit the radial migration of the following neuron. This mechanism may contribute to the synchronized radial migrations within the UCP.

Dscam is expressed in queues across the UCP

Our previous data showed that Dscam expression increased dramatically in the UCP at E19. Moreover, the increased Dscam expression was concentrated in radial-migrating neurons. We wondered whether the high level of Dscam expression correlates with the synchronized radial migration. In-situ hybridization (ISH) in the E19 cortical plate shows that the Dscam expression covers the UCP with a width of 158.7±28.2 μm below the dorsal boundary of the CP (Figure 2A). The Dscam-positive signal labels queues of individual cells, in locations coincident with the reports in Figure 1, starting at the dorsal border of the CP and extending across the UCP (Figure 2A and 2C, green square brackets labeled). At E19, the average length of Dscam-expressing cells was 148.2±26.5 μm (Figure 2B). In contrast, the Dscam signal in the DSCAM−/− brain was absent (Figure 2A, DSCAM−/−). Next, we aimed to determine whether the cells expressing Dscam are radial-migrating neurons. To address this question, IUE was performed in E14.5 embryos to label migrating neurons with RFP. By E19, the RFP-labeled neurons had entered the UCP. Cells were labeled by ISH to monitor Dscam mRNA distribution. We found that all the radial migratory neurons (red, highlighted with green arrowheads) also expressed Dscam (Figure 2C, green arrowheads). This indicates that IUE-labeled migrating neurons express Dscam as they begin to queue. The queue structure, Dscam expression, and lack of queuing in the DSCAM−/− brain suggest that the DSCAM-DSCAM interactions may inhibit the radial migration of the following neuron. This mechanism may contribute to the synchronized radial migrations within the UCP.

DSCAM is necessary to maintain the sequential order of neurons during radial migration.Based on the Dscam expression pattern revealed by ISH and its known role in regulating cell spacing and axon guidance,[24, 33] we speculated that DSCAM interaction might function to maintain the queue of radial migration. Therefore, we predicted that when a fast-migrating neuron from LCP is approaching a slow-migrating neuron suspended at the bottom of the UCP, the fast radial migration will slow and not progress past the leading neuron. The time-lapse observation focused on the bottom of the UCP, ~150 μm below the dorsal border of the CP. As expected, the new-coming neurons were found migrating swiftly from the LCP (Figure 3A WT, magenta arrowheads) and approached the neurons suspended at the bottom of the UCP (Figure 3A WT, green arrowheads, 5:00-8:00). At this point, the fast-migrating neurons halted rapid progress (Figure 3A, WT 8:00-12:00), while in the Dscam−/− brain, the fast-migrating neurons (magenta arrowheads) approached and bypassed the leading neurons (Figure 3A, Dscam−/− 1:00-3:30, green arrowheads). In WT, most trailing neurons halted (85.9±7.6%) after reaching the leading neurons. In the Dscam−/− brains, the number decreased to 27.6±24.0% (Figure 3B). The relative positions between the leading neurons and the following neurons after their encounter were analyzed. On average, the following neurons were localized to a narrow range of 7.0±6.1 μm below the base of the leading neurons in WT (Figure 3C). This suggests that the following neurons pause when encountering the leading neurons, remaining in a consistent relative position. In Dscam−/−, the trailing neurons continued to migrate after encountering the leading neurons, allowing them to move to positions both ahead of and behind the leading neurons. The relative positions are highly variable, with the following neurons at an average of 9.6±13.7 μm above the leading neurons (Figure 3C). A diagram illustrates the structure of the DSCAM queue across the UCP (Figure 3D). The migrating neurons in the DSCAM queue block one by one (Green circles in Figure 3D) from the dorsal border of the cortical plate to the bottom (Left row, WT). The leading neurons create space for the following neurons (the second left row in WT), allowing them to migrate upwards and thus creating space for the next neuron, though the leading neuron remains at the top in WT. Without DSCAM, the radial-migrating neurons lost the blockage from the leading position and migrated consistently to the border of the CP (Figure 3D, Dscam−/−). Nevertheless, these results indicate that DSCAM is required to restrict the radial migration of following neurons, thereby forming the queue of radial migration.

DSCAM is necessary to maintain the sequential order of neurons during radial migration.

Based on the Dscam expression pattern revealed by ISH and its known role in regulating cell spacing and axon guidance,[24, 33] we speculated that DSCAM interaction might function to maintain the queue of radial migration. Therefore, we predicted that when a fast-migrating neuron from LCP is approaching a slow-migrating neuron suspended at the bottom of the UCP, the fast radial migration will slow and not progress past the leading neuron. The time-lapse observation focused on the bottom of the UCP, ~150 μm below the dorsal border of the CP. As expected, the new-coming neurons were found migrating swiftly from the LCP (Figure 3A WT, magenta arrowheads) and approached the neurons suspended at the bottom of the UCP (Figure 3A WT, green arrowheads, 5:00-8:00). At this point, the fast-migrating neurons halted rapid progress (Figure 3A, WT 8:00-12:00), while in the Dscam−/− brain, the fast-migrating neurons (magenta arrowheads) approached and bypassed the leading neurons (Figure 3A, Dscam−/− 1:00-3:30, green arrowheads). In WT, most trailing neurons halted (85.9±7.6%) after reaching the leading neurons. In the Dscam−/− brains, the number decreased to 27.6±24.0% (Figure 3B). The relative positions between the leading neurons and the following neurons after their encounter were analyzed. On average, the following neurons were localized to a narrow range of 7.0±6.1 μm below the base of the leading neurons in WT (Figure 3C). This suggests that the following neurons pause when encountering the leading neurons, remaining in a consistent relative position. In Dscam−/−, the trailing neurons continued to migrate after encountering the leading neurons, allowing them to move to positions both ahead of and behind the leading neurons. The relative positions are highly variable, with the following neurons at an average of 9.6±13.7 μm above the leading neurons (Figure 3C). A diagram illustrates the structure of the DSCAM queue across the UCP (Figure 3D). The migrating neurons in the DSCAM queue block one by one (Green circles in Figure 3D) from the dorsal border of the cortical plate to the bottom (Left row, WT). The leading neurons create space for the following neurons (the second left row in WT), allowing them to migrate upwards and thus creating space for the next neuron, though the leading neuron remains at the top in WT. Without DSCAM, the radial-migrating neurons lost the blockage from the leading position and migrated consistently to the border of the CP (Figure 3D, Dscam−/−). Nevertheless, these results indicate that DSCAM is required to restrict the radial migration of following neurons, thereby forming the queue of radial migration.

The cell-type autonomy of DSCAM in radial migrationDSCAM can act as a homophilic cell adhesion molecule[33], requiring neurons trans interaction to block cadherin-mediated adhesion[34]. However, DSCAM can also interact with a number of heterologous ligands,[36] and it remains unclear whether maintaining the order of migratory neurons depends on DSCAM expression in both the leading and following neurons. To address this question, the DscamF/+ mice (carrying the loxP sites which can flank the exon of transmembrane domain [37]) were bred to produce DscamF/+ or DscamF/F embryos. IUE was performed on E14.5 embryos to label the NPCs and simultaneously knock out DSCAM using a Cre-expressing vector. Cre expression led to the knockout of one or both copies of Dscam, generating Dscam-heterozygous or Dscam-knockout NPCs. Consequently, all descendant neurons derived from these NPCs became Dscam heterozygous or knockout within a background of otherwise normal DSCAM expression. The E19.5 embryonic brains were collected 5 days later, and neuronal distribution in these brains was analyzed. In DscamF/+, the migrating neurons (GFP) distribute evenly across the UCP, while in DscamF/F, these neurons (GFP, knockout) accumulate in a narrower range along the dorsal border of the cortical plate (Figure 4A). Heterozygous migrating neurons evenly disperse in the UCP, with an average distance of −54.0±32.8 μm below the border of the CP. Knockout migrating neurons disperse in a narrow range, more accumulated (Figure 4A), with an average distance of −36.2±27.0 μm below the border of the CP (Figure 4C). This indicates that, in a normal DSCAM environment where most of the radial migrating neurons express DSCAM, WT neurons failed to block the DSCAM knockout neurons’ radial migration. The accumulation of Dscam knockout neurons can be rescued by co-transfection of the DSCAM overexpression vector during IUE (Figure 4B). Dscam knockout neurons with DSCAM overexpression disperse evenly in the UCP, indicating the cell-autonomy of DSCAM in the distribution of migrating neurons. The average distance is −64.1±34.8 μm below the border of the cortical plate (Figure 4C).We also tested whether Dscam null neurons can block the radial migration of a DSCAM-positive neuron to address the possibility that DSCAM was interacting with a heterologous ligand. DSCAM-overexpressing vector was in-utero injected and transfected into NPCs of Dscam−/− mice and their WT siblings through IUE to test if DSCAM overexpression can recover the blockage of radial migration in a background of otherwise Dscam-null cortical plate (Figure 4D). The E19.5 embryonic brains were collected 5 days after the IUE transfection to analyze the neuronal distribution in these brains. In WT, the migrating neurons distribute evenly in the UCP, with an average distance of 70.9±35.3 μm to the dorsal border of CP (Figure 4E). In a Dscam−/− background, the DSCAM overexpression neurons accumulate under the border of the cortical plate and distribute in a narrower area, with 50.9±33.3 μm on average to the dorsal border of the cortical plate (Figures 4D and 4E). This indicates that DSCAM-positive neurons cannot be blocked by DSCAM-null neurons in the developing cortical plate, indicating that the DSCAM from leading directions is necessary for blocking those following neurons. We also found that DSCAM expression within the migrating train of neurons in an otherwise Dscam−/− background is sufficient to inhibit the trailing neurons of the transfected train. These results demonstrate that DSCAM is required from both the leading neuron and the following neuron to halt the radial migration of the following neurons and that its expression is sufficient within a train of migrating neurons to inhibit migration. In migrating neurons, DSCAM functions in a cell-type autonomous manner, that is acting between neurons of the migrating train, consistent with homotypic binding between migrating neurons, in order to maintain the order between the leading neuron and the following neuron, thereby ensuring the queue of radial-migrating neurons.

The cell-type autonomy of DSCAM in radial migration

DSCAM can act as a homophilic cell adhesion molecule[33], requiring neurons trans interaction to block cadherin-mediated adhesion[34]. However, DSCAM can also interact with a number of heterologous ligands,[36] and it remains unclear whether maintaining the order of migratory neurons depends on DSCAM expression in both the leading and following neurons. To address this question, the DscamF/+ mice (carrying the loxP sites which can flank the exon of transmembrane domain [37]) were bred to produce DscamF/+ or DscamF/F embryos. IUE was performed on E14.5 embryos to label the NPCs and simultaneously knock out DSCAM using a Cre-expressing vector. Cre expression led to the knockout of one or both copies of Dscam, generating Dscam-heterozygous or Dscam-knockout NPCs. Consequently, all descendant neurons derived from these NPCs became Dscam heterozygous or knockout within a background of otherwise normal DSCAM expression. The E19.5 embryonic brains were collected 5 days later, and neuronal distribution in these brains was analyzed. In DscamF/+, the migrating neurons (GFP) distribute evenly across the UCP, while in DscamF/F, these neurons (GFP, knockout) accumulate in a narrower range along the dorsal border of the cortical plate (Figure 4A). Heterozygous migrating neurons evenly disperse in the UCP, with an average distance of −54.0±32.8 μm below the border of the CP. Knockout migrating neurons disperse in a narrow range, more accumulated (Figure 4A), with an average distance of −36.2±27.0 μm below the border of the CP (Figure 4C). This indicates that, in a normal DSCAM environment where most of the radial migrating neurons express DSCAM, WT neurons failed to block the DSCAM knockout neurons’ radial migration. The accumulation of Dscam knockout neurons can be rescued by co-transfection of the DSCAM overexpression vector during IUE (Figure 4B). Dscam knockout neurons with DSCAM overexpression disperse evenly in the UCP, indicating the cell-autonomy of DSCAM in the distribution of migrating neurons. The average distance is −64.1±34.8 μm below the border of the cortical plate (Figure 4C).

We also tested whether Dscam null neurons can block the radial migration of a DSCAM-positive neuron to address the possibility that DSCAM was interacting with a heterologous ligand. DSCAM-overexpressing vector was in-utero injected and transfected into NPCs of Dscam−/− mice and their WT siblings through IUE to test if DSCAM overexpression can recover the blockage of radial migration in a background of otherwise Dscam-null cortical plate (Figure 4D). The E19.5 embryonic brains were collected 5 days after the IUE transfection to analyze the neuronal distribution in these brains. In WT, the migrating neurons distribute evenly in the UCP, with an average distance of 70.9±35.3 μm to the dorsal border of CP (Figure 4E). In a Dscam−/− background, the DSCAM overexpression neurons accumulate under the border of the cortical plate and distribute in a narrower area, with 50.9±33.3 μm on average to the dorsal border of the cortical plate (Figures 4D and 4E). This indicates that DSCAM-positive neurons cannot be blocked by DSCAM-null neurons in the developing cortical plate, indicating that the DSCAM from leading directions is necessary for blocking those following neurons. We also found that DSCAM expression within the migrating train of neurons in an otherwise Dscam−/− background is sufficient to inhibit the trailing neurons of the transfected train. These results demonstrate that DSCAM is required from both the leading neuron and the following neuron to halt the radial migration of the following neurons and that its expression is sufficient within a train of migrating neurons to inhibit migration. In migrating neurons, DSCAM functions in a cell-type autonomous manner, that is acting between neurons of the migrating train, consistent with homotypic binding between migrating neurons, in order to maintain the order between the leading neuron and the following neuron, thereby ensuring the queue of radial-migrating neurons.

F-actin accumulates in the Dscam null brain and is correlated with the persistence of cadherin-mediated adhesion.Time-lapse imaging revealed that right after the leading neuron moved up and made a space for the following neurons, the following neuron promptly extended its leading process, thickening its proximal end to form the proximal cytoplasmic dilation of the leading process (PCDLP, [13]) (Figure 1D, upper panel 1:00-2:00, the square brackets). The extension of PCDLP is the necessary step to trigger the saltatory nucleokinesis of the radial migration (Figure 1D, upper panel 1:00-4:00, the square brackets). This phenomenon indicates that the leading neurons directly suppress the expansion of PCDLP, thereby preventing saltatory nucleokinesis. To validate this, we studied the PCDLP of the migratory neurons within UCP and LCP, respectively. We found that 14.7±7.5% of migrating neurons in WT UCP have PCDLP, significantly lower than the 94.6±3.1% in the Dscam−/− UCP, 82.8±8.4% in the WT LCP, and 92.6±5.9% in the Dscam−/− LCP (Figure 5D). Most migrating neurons in the WT UCP lack PCDLP, supporting the notion that the leading neurons may restrict the radial migration of following neurons by inhibiting the expansion of their PCDLP.F-actin assembly leads to the protrusion of the lamellipodia at the proximal end of the leading process, resulting in the expansion of the PCDLP[13]. Therefore, F-actin is a key feature that represents nucleokinesis activity. To determine whether F-actin is decreased in UCP, we labeled the F-actin in the E18.5 cortical plate using phalloidin. The F-actin intensity was normalized to the ML F-actin intensity, which remained consistent across all samples (Figure 5A). The relative signal strength was calculated as: (F-actin intensity / F-actin intensity in ML) %. F-actin relative strength in WT UCP is 42.6±3.9%, significantly lower than 58.2±7.2% in the Dscam−/− UCP (Figure 5B). While the F-actin relative signal is comparable in WT LCP (53.7±5.6%), Dscam−/− UCP (58.2±7.2%), and Dscam−/− LCP (51.8±11.8%) (Figure 5B). High-magnification images were taken, and radial-migrating neurons were examined individually to directly observe the F-actin in individual neurons. We found that the radial-migrating neurons contain a low level of F-actin in the WT UCP (Figure 5C). In Dscam−/− UCP, F-actin is highly assembled throughout the soma and the leading process (Figure 5C’). 13.7±7.1% of radial-migrating neurons in WT UCP contain the F-actin signal in the leading process. While F-actin can be detected in 96.7±3.0% of radial migrating neurons in Dscam−/− UCP. The percentage is comparable in Dscam−/− UCP, WT LCP (90.4±9.7%), and Dscam−/− LCP (95.4±1.4%) (Figure 5E). These observations confirmed that, in WT UCP, the level of F-actin in the proximal end of the leading process and the soma is low. The low F-actin level suggests the loss of lamellipodia in the proximal end of the leading process. This supports the idea that the expansion of PCDLP is blocked by the leading neuron and, thereafter, the saltatory nucleokinesis. This prompted us to wonder how the DSCAM interaction between the leading neuron and the following neuron dramatically reduces F-actin assembly in the following neuron.Cadherin adhesion facilitates and maintains the F-actin assembly during lamellipodia protrusion[38]. Cadherin adhesion stabilizes the extended lamellipodia and inhibits the retrograde flow of the F-actin, ensuring directed and persistent protrusion[38, 39]. The cadherin adhesion of Cdh2[15], Cdh3, and Cdh6[34] is blocked by DSCAM during the morphogenesis of retinal mosaic and cerebral cortex, thereby modulating the cellular distribution. Hence, DSCAM is thought to function as “masking” cadherin adhesion in general.N-cadherin (Cdh2) is essential for proper radial migration[40], as its adhesion around neurons promotes F-actin assembly beneath the adhesion sites[38]. This makes N-cadherin an ideal candidate to study the potential mechanistic connection between DSCAM and cadherin adhesion. Immunohistochemistry of N-cadherin was performed on the E19 brain slice to evaluate the neuronal adhesion in the UCP. The results showed that the N-cadherin in the WT UCP was diffused and smeared. In contrast, N-cadherin exhibited strong, well-defined adhesive puncta in the Dscam−/− UCP, indicating robust cadherin-mediated adhesion without DSCAM (Figure 5F). The enlarged images revealed that N-cadherin adhesion (green puncta) is present on the cell surface across the entire cell body and the leading process in Dscam−/−, forming adhesions with other neurons (Figure 5G), with 1.01±0.06 puncta per μm on the edge of the soma and leading process. In WT, the N-cadherin puncta density decreases to 0.19±0.05 puncta per μm on the edge of soma and leading process (Figure 5H). These results support that DSCAM is required for blocking cadherin-mediated adhesion among migrating neurons. Without N-cadherin adhesion, F-actin disassembles in the following neuron to dismantle its nucleokinesis in the WT UCP.

F-actin accumulates in the Dscam null brain and is correlated with the persistence of cadherin-mediated adhesion.

Time-lapse imaging revealed that right after the leading neuron moved up and made a space for the following neurons, the following neuron promptly extended its leading process, thickening its proximal end to form the proximal cytoplasmic dilation of the leading process (PCDLP, [13]) (Figure 1D, upper panel 1:00-2:00, the square brackets). The extension of PCDLP is the necessary step to trigger the saltatory nucleokinesis of the radial migration (Figure 1D, upper panel 1:00-4:00, the square brackets). This phenomenon indicates that the leading neurons directly suppress the expansion of PCDLP, thereby preventing saltatory nucleokinesis. To validate this, we studied the PCDLP of the migratory neurons within UCP and LCP, respectively. We found that 14.7±7.5% of migrating neurons in WT UCP have PCDLP, significantly lower than the 94.6±3.1% in the Dscam−/− UCP, 82.8±8.4% in the WT LCP, and 92.6±5.9% in the Dscam−/− LCP (Figure 5D). Most migrating neurons in the WT UCP lack PCDLP, supporting the notion that the leading neurons may restrict the radial migration of following neurons by inhibiting the expansion of their PCDLP.

F-actin assembly leads to the protrusion of the lamellipodia at the proximal end of the leading process, resulting in the expansion of the PCDLP[13]. Therefore, F-actin is a key feature that represents nucleokinesis activity. To determine whether F-actin is decreased in UCP, we labeled the F-actin in the E18.5 cortical plate using phalloidin. The F-actin intensity was normalized to the ML F-actin intensity, which remained consistent across all samples (Figure 5A). The relative signal strength was calculated as: (F-actin intensity / F-actin intensity in ML) %. F-actin relative strength in WT UCP is 42.6±3.9%, significantly lower than 58.2±7.2% in the Dscam−/− UCP (Figure 5B). While the F-actin relative signal is comparable in WT LCP (53.7±5.6%), Dscam−/− UCP (58.2±7.2%), and Dscam−/− LCP (51.8±11.8%) (Figure 5B). High-magnification images were taken, and radial-migrating neurons were examined individually to directly observe the F-actin in individual neurons. We found that the radial-migrating neurons contain a low level of F-actin in the WT UCP (Figure 5C). In Dscam−/− UCP, F-actin is highly assembled throughout the soma and the leading process (Figure 5C’). 13.7±7.1% of radial-migrating neurons in WT UCP contain the F-actin signal in the leading process. While F-actin can be detected in 96.7±3.0% of radial migrating neurons in Dscam−/− UCP. The percentage is comparable in Dscam−/− UCP, WT LCP (90.4±9.7%), and Dscam−/− LCP (95.4±1.4%) (Figure 5E). These observations confirmed that, in WT UCP, the level of F-actin in the proximal end of the leading process and the soma is low. The low F-actin level suggests the loss of lamellipodia in the proximal end of the leading process. This supports the idea that the expansion of PCDLP is blocked by the leading neuron and, thereafter, the saltatory nucleokinesis. This prompted us to wonder how the DSCAM interaction between the leading neuron and the following neuron dramatically reduces F-actin assembly in the following neuron.

Cadherin adhesion facilitates and maintains the F-actin assembly during lamellipodia protrusion[38]. Cadherin adhesion stabilizes the extended lamellipodia and inhibits the retrograde flow of the F-actin, ensuring directed and persistent protrusion[38, 39]. The cadherin adhesion of Cdh2[15], Cdh3, and Cdh6[34] is blocked by DSCAM during the morphogenesis of retinal mosaic and cerebral cortex, thereby modulating the cellular distribution. Hence, DSCAM is thought to function as “masking” cadherin adhesion in general.

N-cadherin (Cdh2) is essential for proper radial migration[40], as its adhesion around neurons promotes F-actin assembly beneath the adhesion sites[38]. This makes N-cadherin an ideal candidate to study the potential mechanistic connection between DSCAM and cadherin adhesion. Immunohistochemistry of N-cadherin was performed on the E19 brain slice to evaluate the neuronal adhesion in the UCP. The results showed that the N-cadherin in the WT UCP was diffused and smeared. In contrast, N-cadherin exhibited strong, well-defined adhesive puncta in the Dscam−/− UCP, indicating robust cadherin-mediated adhesion without DSCAM (Figure 5F). The enlarged images revealed that N-cadherin adhesion (green puncta) is present on the cell surface across the entire cell body and the leading process in Dscam−/−, forming adhesions with other neurons (Figure 5G), with 1.01±0.06 puncta per μm on the edge of the soma and leading process. In WT, the N-cadherin puncta density decreases to 0.19±0.05 puncta per μm on the edge of soma and leading process (Figure 5H). These results support that DSCAM is required for blocking cadherin-mediated adhesion among migrating neurons. Without N-cadherin adhesion, F-actin disassembles in the following neuron to dismantle its nucleokinesis in the WT UCP.

Gaps and limited cadherin adhesion among wild-type neurons compared to Dscam−/− neuronsHow does DSCAM block the cadherin-mediated adhesion? To answer that question, N-cadherin-BFP was transfected into HeLa cells, either alone or co-transfected with DSCAM-mNeonGreen (Figure 6A, schematic). Without DSCAM, N-cadherin from neighboring HeLa cells formed the adhesive puncta (Figure 6A, w/o DSCAM). In the presence of DSCAM, N-cadherin from neighboring HeLa cells was separated by a narrow cleft of 1.36±0.56 μm in width (Figure 6A, w/DSCAM). Although the N-cadherin existed on both sides of the cleft and was positioned on the processes extending out, they failed to contact each other across the cleft (Figure 6A), indicating that DSCAM doesn’t expel the N-cadherin from the cell surface and doesn’t affect the extension of the N-cadherin process in the cleft. Instead, DSCAM may block the N-cadherin processes from encountering across the cleft. In fact, we noticed that the cleft between two N-cadherin+ HeLa cells was filled with thin fibers of DSCAM-mNeonGreen. The DSCAM fibers are dramatically thinner, longer, and denser than those of the N-cadherin process (Figure 6A, green). These features indicate that the DSCAM fibers touch the other cell far before the N-cadherin processes make contact. It is possible that the dense DSCAM fibers may interrupt the interaction of the N-cadherin processes from forming the N-cadherin adhesion.

Gaps and limited cadherin adhesion among wild-type neurons compared to Dscam−/− neurons

How does DSCAM block the cadherin-mediated adhesion? To answer that question, N-cadherin-BFP was transfected into HeLa cells, either alone or co-transfected with DSCAM-mNeonGreen (Figure 6A, schematic). Without DSCAM, N-cadherin from neighboring HeLa cells formed the adhesive puncta (Figure 6A, w/o DSCAM). In the presence of DSCAM, N-cadherin from neighboring HeLa cells was separated by a narrow cleft of 1.36±0.56 μm in width (Figure 6A, w/DSCAM). Although the N-cadherin existed on both sides of the cleft and was positioned on the processes extending out, they failed to contact each other across the cleft (Figure 6A), indicating that DSCAM doesn’t expel the N-cadherin from the cell surface and doesn’t affect the extension of the N-cadherin process in the cleft. Instead, DSCAM may block the N-cadherin processes from encountering across the cleft. In fact, we noticed that the cleft between two N-cadherin+ HeLa cells was filled with thin fibers of DSCAM-mNeonGreen. The DSCAM fibers are dramatically thinner, longer, and denser than those of the N-cadherin process (Figure 6A, green). These features indicate that the DSCAM fibers touch the other cell far before the N-cadherin processes make contact. It is possible that the dense DSCAM fibers may interrupt the interaction of the N-cadherin processes from forming the N-cadherin adhesion.

DSCAM fiber fills the space between migrating neurons and separates the neuronsThe next question we addressed is whether DSCAM also generates gaps between migrating neurons. In UCP, the neurons were isolated from each other (Figure 6B, WT). Each neuron contacted fewer than one other cell, 0.65±0.25 on average (Figure 6D, WT). The clefts separating the adjacent neurons are 0.64±0.27μm on average (Figure 6E). In the Dscam−/− UCP, the neurons were squeezed together (Figure 6B and 6D, Dscam−/−). Each neuron directly contacted about 2.98±0.19 other neurons (Figure 6D). The clefts among neurons narrowed to ~0.04±0.12μm in width (Figure 6E). Does this mean that DSCAM separates the radial-migrating neurons from each other?To answer the question, DSCAM-mNeonGreen was over-expressed in the migratory neurons with IUE, so that DSCAM could be observed in vivo. We found that the DSCAM signal (Green) encircles the cell body (Red) of the migrating neurons (Figure 6C, labeled with 0). Clefts between neurons were stuffed by DSCAM, and the labeled cell body (cell 0) was separated from the other cells (Figure 6C, cells 1, 2, and 3). The dashed lines labeling the bottom edge of the leading neuron and the front edge of the following neuron (Figure 6C, WT) showed that DSCAM fills the cleft in between and separates them (Figure 6C and 6F, WT). Comparable to the observation in the HeLa cell, DSCAM is located on the dense and thin fibers extended from the cell body of the migrating neuron (Figure 6C). Surprisingly, in Dscam−/−, the DSCAM signal is inside the migrating neurons (Figure 6C, Dscam−/−, neuron 0). The neurons (neuron 0 and neurons 1, 2, and 3) in Dscam−/− UCP are not separated (Figure 6C and 6F, Dscam−/−). These results indicate that DSCAM is required to generate clefts among neurons to separate them in the UCP (Figures 6C and 6F).

DSCAM fiber fills the space between migrating neurons and separates the neurons

The next question we addressed is whether DSCAM also generates gaps between migrating neurons. In UCP, the neurons were isolated from each other (Figure 6B, WT). Each neuron contacted fewer than one other cell, 0.65±0.25 on average (Figure 6D, WT). The clefts separating the adjacent neurons are 0.64±0.27μm on average (Figure 6E). In the Dscam−/− UCP, the neurons were squeezed together (Figure 6B and 6D, Dscam−/−). Each neuron directly contacted about 2.98±0.19 other neurons (Figure 6D). The clefts among neurons narrowed to ~0.04±0.12μm in width (Figure 6E). Does this mean that DSCAM separates the radial-migrating neurons from each other?

To answer the question, DSCAM-mNeonGreen was over-expressed in the migratory neurons with IUE, so that DSCAM could be observed in vivo. We found that the DSCAM signal (Green) encircles the cell body (Red) of the migrating neurons (Figure 6C, labeled with 0). Clefts between neurons were stuffed by DSCAM, and the labeled cell body (cell 0) was separated from the other cells (Figure 6C, cells 1, 2, and 3). The dashed lines labeling the bottom edge of the leading neuron and the front edge of the following neuron (Figure 6C, WT) showed that DSCAM fills the cleft in between and separates them (Figure 6C and 6F, WT). Comparable to the observation in the HeLa cell, DSCAM is located on the dense and thin fibers extended from the cell body of the migrating neuron (Figure 6C). Surprisingly, in Dscam−/−, the DSCAM signal is inside the migrating neurons (Figure 6C, Dscam−/−, neuron 0). The neurons (neuron 0 and neurons 1, 2, and 3) in Dscam−/− UCP are not separated (Figure 6C and 6F, Dscam−/−). These results indicate that DSCAM is required to generate clefts among neurons to separate them in the UCP (Figures 6C and 6F).

DSCAM blocks the cadherin-mediated adhesion among radial-migrating neurons.If DSCAM directly separates adjacent neurons, cadherin-mediated adhesion between these neurons is likely to be suppressed. As a result, N-cadherin overexpression should not induce additional adhesion in the WT CP. However, if N-cadherin is over-expressed in the Dscam−/− CP, additional adhesion would be expected. During radial migration, the clustering of migratory neurons should be expected in the Dscam−/− CP. To confirm the DSCAM’s role in suppressing cell-cell adhesion, IUE was done on E14.5 by over-expressing N-cadherin-GFP in NPCs along the dorsal telencephalon. The distribution of migratory neurons in E18.5 was analyzed in both WT and Dscam−/− embryonic UCPs. In WT, radial-migrating neurons with N-cadherin overexpression did not form a cluster in the UCP, and only 11±6% of migratory neurons contacted the other migratory neurons (Figure 7A and 7B). In contrast, in Dscam−/−, migratory neurons with N-cadherin overexpression formed clusters, with approximately 53±5% of migratory neurons found in each cluster (Figure 7A and 7B). These results indicate that DSCAM is dominant in suppressing the cadherin-mediated adhesion in the UCP.

DSCAM blocks the cadherin-mediated adhesion among radial-migrating neurons.

If DSCAM directly separates adjacent neurons, cadherin-mediated adhesion between these neurons is likely to be suppressed. As a result, N-cadherin overexpression should not induce additional adhesion in the WT CP. However, if N-cadherin is over-expressed in the Dscam−/− CP, additional adhesion would be expected. During radial migration, the clustering of migratory neurons should be expected in the Dscam−/− CP. To confirm the DSCAM’s role in suppressing cell-cell adhesion, IUE was done on E14.5 by over-expressing N-cadherin-GFP in NPCs along the dorsal telencephalon. The distribution of migratory neurons in E18.5 was analyzed in both WT and Dscam−/− embryonic UCPs. In WT, radial-migrating neurons with N-cadherin overexpression did not form a cluster in the UCP, and only 11±6% of migratory neurons contacted the other migratory neurons (Figure 7A and 7B). In contrast, in Dscam−/−, migratory neurons with N-cadherin overexpression formed clusters, with approximately 53±5% of migratory neurons found in each cluster (Figure 7A and 7B). These results indicate that DSCAM is dominant in suppressing the cadherin-mediated adhesion in the UCP.

DISCUSSIONThe queue of radial migratory neuronsThis study shows that radial migration in the upper cortical plate differs from migration in the lower cortical plate and intermediate zone. Before entering the upper cortical plate, radial migration occurs at a fast and constant rate. However, in the upper cortical plate, radial migration becomes inconsistent and mostly suspended. Every several hours, the neuron undergoes one episode of saltatory nucleokinesis. We find that this process occurs in a different fashion in mice lacking the DSCAM expression. To understand the mechanism underpinning this, we utilized in-situ hybridization to label the Dscam mRNA in the upper cortical plate. The Dscam mRNA-labeled individual neurons are organized into queues across the entire upper cortical plate on embryonic day (E) 19. These queues extend from the top of the cortical plate through the upper cortical plate, maintaining the sequential order of migrating neurons within it. In Dscam−/− UCP, the queue labeled by in-situ hybridization disappears, and those neurons consistently migrate to the dorsal border of the UCP, suggesting a model in which the queue of radial-migrating neurons blocks fast radial migration by DSCAM. We find that reintroduction of DSCAM in an otherwise Dscam−/− background rescues the wild-type phenotype in trailing neurons of the train but not in the leading neurons of the train. This finding is consistent with DSCAM-DSCAM interactions functioning to maintain order within the queue.The time-lapse imaging supports this model by showing the leading neurons blocking the following neurons. First, the synchronized radial migration was found in the E18.5 UCP. When the leading neurons moved forward and made space for the following neurons, the latter immediately filled the positions the leading neurons left. A queue of migratory neurons can explain the synchronized radial migration. Second, at the bottom of the upper cortical plate, when the fast-migrating neurons approached the suspended neurons from the lower cortical plate, their progress was blocked abruptly under the suspended neurons. This process clearly shows that the migratory neurons at the leading position limit the radial migration speed of the neurons beneath them. The process also shows that a newly arrived neuron joined and extended the queue from the bottom.The order of nascent radial-migrating neurons has also been observed in Reeler mice. Instead of forming the “inside-out” cortex, these mice exhibit an inverted cortex. In Reeler mice, early born neurons failed to detach from radial glia, so their radial migration had not been completed. The following neurons were blocked and arranged along the radial glia, with earlier-born neurons positioned at the top of the cortical plate (or outside of the cortical plate) and later-born neurons located within. It indicates that, in Reeler mice, later-born neurons cannot bypass the early-born neurons during their radial migration. At the cellular level, the radial-migrating neurons maintain the sequential order in the queue, which explains the phenomenon observed in Reeler mice. The arrangement renders the inverted cerebral cortex in Reeler.The queue of radial-migrating neurons facilitates the “inside-out” morphogenesis of the cerebral cortexOur previous research revealed that most following neurons bypass their leading neurons to enter the emerging cortical layers. However, for this to occur, it is essential that the leading neurons complete radial migration and detach from the radial glia, enabling the following neurons to advance and eventually bypass the post-migratory leading neurons. Migrating neurons maintain their order in the queue; however, they reverse their position at the top of the queue upon completing radial migration. This inversion transforms the original order of the radial-migrating neurons into the characteristic “inside-out” organization of the upper cortical layers. Thus, the queue of the radial-migrating neurons is essential for proper formation of the cerebral cortex.Reelin and DSCAM collaborate at the dorsal border of the developing cortical plate. Reelin reduces cell adhesion on the top of the radial glia around the border of the cortical plate. This precise location ensures that the radial-migrating neurons detach at the uppermost region of the radial glia rather than within the cortical plate. The neurons stopping inside the cortical plate, therefore, will not detach. Migratory wild-type neurons arrive at the dorsal border of the cortical plate in a sequential manner. In the Dscam null allele mutant, the time-lapse imaging reveals that radial-migrating neurons can reach the dorsal border of the cortical plate (which is controlled by Reelin) simultaneously, but cluster at the same location. This results in denser and thinner upper cortical layers. These results indicate that reelin and DSCAM each act to ensure the formation of the “inside-out” cerebral cortex. However, how new positions are created within the emerging cortical layer for queued radial-migrating neurons is unclear. Although this process is crucial for regulating the pace of cerebral cortical morphogenesis. Neurons in many regions of the brain are generated in an ordered fashion from a pool of common progenitors. The ordered migration facilitated by genes such as Reln and Dscam may function to orchestrate an appropriate distribution of neurons.DSCAM blocks the Cadherin-mediated adhesion to stop the radial migrationThe leading neuron hinders the radial migration of subsequent neurons by obstructing the expansion of the proximal cytoplasmic dilation of the leading process (PCDLP), which is necessary to initiate nucleokinesis. Once the leading neuron advances, it creates space for the following neuron to extend its PCDLP and trigger its nucleokinesis. F-actin assembly at the proximal end of the leading process and cell body is essential for expanding the PCDLP. We found that F-actin levels are low in the WT upper cortical plate. Radial-migrating neurons form queues in the upper cortical plate. The low level of F-actin in the leading process of the neurons is consistent with the low level of PCDLP expansion. These phenomena indicate the blockage of the PCDLP expansion in the WT UCP. In the Dscam null mutant, the F-actin was assembled in the upper cortical plate compared to wild type, offering an explanation for the high activity of PCDLP expansion in the Dscam null mutant. The F-actin results support the idea that DSCAM in the upper cortical plate blocks F-actin assembly and, thus, hinders the formation of PCDLP and nucleokinesis. A similar phenomenon has been reported in the mouse retina, where Dscam loss and gain of function studies link the protein to the refinement of dendrite sprouts during lamination. Our study here offers a molecular mechanism to explain the findings here and in earlier studies in retina.F-actin assembly relies on cadherin-mediated adhesion during lamellipodia extension and PCDLP expansion. Though previous studies demonstrated that DSCAM blocks Cadherin-mediated adhesion, the underlying mechanism remains unknown. Here, we cultured HeLa cells and overexpressed N-cadherin with or without DSCAM to assay the relationship between DSCAM and N-cadherin. We found that N-cadherin in HeLa cells formed cell-cell adhesion in the absence of DSCAM. Mature N-cadherin puncta zipped two N-cadherin+ HeLa cells together. Immature adhesion was also observed, where N-cadherin filopodia extended from both cellular cortices and formed connections. It indicates that N-cadherin filopodia need to be extended and connected before they form the mature N-cadherin puncta.We found that DSCAM-positive fibers were long and thin, extending from both cellular cortices and filling the space between the N-cadherin+ HeLa cells, forming a narrow cleft between N-cadherin+ HeLa cells. N-cadherin+ fibers were extended from both sides of the clefts. It indicates that DSCAM does not expel N-cadherin from the cleft. The N-cadherin fibers stay under the DSCAM-positive fibers and may not be able to contact each other. Thus, DSCAM fibers may interrupt the N-cadherin fibers’ transcellular interaction. DSCAM-positive fibers are needed from both sides of adjacent neurons to form connections, thus resulting in the blockage of N-cadherin fibers' contacts. DSCAM fiber trans interaction does not form tight cell connections or trigger F-actin assembly. How DSCAM-positive fibers affect the contacts of N-cadherin fibers is still unknown.DSCAM blocks the N-cadherin adhesion in the developing upper cortical plate. N-cadherin overexpression in WT brains does not cause cell-cell adhesion among the radial-migrating neurons in the upper cortical plate. Whether the levels of Dscam overexpression that occur in trisomy 21 have a similar impact is a logical next step to build on these findings. Meanwhile, N-cadherin induced clustering among radial-migrating neurons in Dscam−/− brains. Interestingly, individual migrating neurons are isolated from each other by narrow clefts and are evenly distributed in the developing upper cortical plate. While the radial-migrating neurons in DSCAM−/− brains clump together, the clefts between migrating neurons disappear. Similar phenomena, similar to those found in HeLa cells, were observed where DSCAM fibers fill the clefts to separate the individual WT radial-migrating neurons. Therefore, N-cadherin adhesion cannot be formed among the WT radial-migrating neurons. In Dscam null allele mutants, the migrating neurons become much closer than those in the WT cortical plate, with N-cadherin adhesion puncta covering the entire cell body and the leading process.This provides a deeper understanding of cortical layer development, which can shed light on the understanding of developmental disorders such as Down syndrome and Autism spectrum disorder.

The queue of radial migratory neuronsThis study shows that radial migration in the upper cortical plate differs from migration in the lower cortical plate and intermediate zone. Before entering the upper cortical plate, radial migration occurs at a fast and constant rate. However, in the upper cortical plate, radial migration becomes inconsistent and mostly suspended. Every several hours, the neuron undergoes one episode of saltatory nucleokinesis. We find that this process occurs in a different fashion in mice lacking the DSCAM expression. To understand the mechanism underpinning this, we utilized in-situ hybridization to label the Dscam mRNA in the upper cortical plate. The Dscam mRNA-labeled individual neurons are organized into queues across the entire upper cortical plate on embryonic day (E) 19. These queues extend from the top of the cortical plate through the upper cortical plate, maintaining the sequential order of migrating neurons within it. In Dscam−/− UCP, the queue labeled by in-situ hybridization disappears, and those neurons consistently migrate to the dorsal border of the UCP, suggesting a model in which the queue of radial-migrating neurons blocks fast radial migration by DSCAM. We find that reintroduction of DSCAM in an otherwise Dscam−/− background rescues the wild-type phenotype in trailing neurons of the train but not in the leading neurons of the train. This finding is consistent with DSCAM-DSCAM interactions functioning to maintain order within the queue.The time-lapse imaging supports this model by showing the leading neurons blocking the following neurons. First, the synchronized radial migration was found in the E18.5 UCP. When the leading neurons moved forward and made space for the following neurons, the latter immediately filled the positions the leading neurons left. A queue of migratory neurons can explain the synchronized radial migration. Second, at the bottom of the upper cortical plate, when the fast-migrating neurons approached the suspended neurons from the lower cortical plate, their progress was blocked abruptly under the suspended neurons. This process clearly shows that the migratory neurons at the leading position limit the radial migration speed of the neurons beneath them. The process also shows that a newly arrived neuron joined and extended the queue from the bottom.The order of nascent radial-migrating neurons has also been observed in Reeler mice. Instead of forming the “inside-out” cortex, these mice exhibit an inverted cortex. In Reeler mice, early born neurons failed to detach from radial glia, so their radial migration had not been completed. The following neurons were blocked and arranged along the radial glia, with earlier-born neurons positioned at the top of the cortical plate (or outside of the cortical plate) and later-born neurons located within. It indicates that, in Reeler mice, later-born neurons cannot bypass the early-born neurons during their radial migration. At the cellular level, the radial-migrating neurons maintain the sequential order in the queue, which explains the phenomenon observed in Reeler mice. The arrangement renders the inverted cerebral cortex in Reeler.

The queue of radial migratory neurons

This study shows that radial migration in the upper cortical plate differs from migration in the lower cortical plate and intermediate zone. Before entering the upper cortical plate, radial migration occurs at a fast and constant rate. However, in the upper cortical plate, radial migration becomes inconsistent and mostly suspended. Every several hours, the neuron undergoes one episode of saltatory nucleokinesis. We find that this process occurs in a different fashion in mice lacking the DSCAM expression. To understand the mechanism underpinning this, we utilized in-situ hybridization to label the Dscam mRNA in the upper cortical plate. The Dscam mRNA-labeled individual neurons are organized into queues across the entire upper cortical plate on embryonic day (E) 19. These queues extend from the top of the cortical plate through the upper cortical plate, maintaining the sequential order of migrating neurons within it. In Dscam−/− UCP, the queue labeled by in-situ hybridization disappears, and those neurons consistently migrate to the dorsal border of the UCP, suggesting a model in which the queue of radial-migrating neurons blocks fast radial migration by DSCAM. We find that reintroduction of DSCAM in an otherwise Dscam−/− background rescues the wild-type phenotype in trailing neurons of the train but not in the leading neurons of the train. This finding is consistent with DSCAM-DSCAM interactions functioning to maintain order within the queue.

The time-lapse imaging supports this model by showing the leading neurons blocking the following neurons. First, the synchronized radial migration was found in the E18.5 UCP. When the leading neurons moved forward and made space for the following neurons, the latter immediately filled the positions the leading neurons left. A queue of migratory neurons can explain the synchronized radial migration. Second, at the bottom of the upper cortical plate, when the fast-migrating neurons approached the suspended neurons from the lower cortical plate, their progress was blocked abruptly under the suspended neurons. This process clearly shows that the migratory neurons at the leading position limit the radial migration speed of the neurons beneath them. The process also shows that a newly arrived neuron joined and extended the queue from the bottom.

The order of nascent radial-migrating neurons has also been observed in Reeler mice. Instead of forming the “inside-out” cortex, these mice exhibit an inverted cortex. In Reeler mice, early born neurons failed to detach from radial glia, so their radial migration had not been completed. The following neurons were blocked and arranged along the radial glia, with earlier-born neurons positioned at the top of the cortical plate (or outside of the cortical plate) and later-born neurons located within. It indicates that, in Reeler mice, later-born neurons cannot bypass the early-born neurons during their radial migration. At the cellular level, the radial-migrating neurons maintain the sequential order in the queue, which explains the phenomenon observed in Reeler mice. The arrangement renders the inverted cerebral cortex in Reeler.

The queue of radial-migrating neurons facilitates the “inside-out” morphogenesis of the cerebral cortexOur previous research revealed that most following neurons bypass their leading neurons to enter the emerging cortical layers. However, for this to occur, it is essential that the leading neurons complete radial migration and detach from the radial glia, enabling the following neurons to advance and eventually bypass the post-migratory leading neurons. Migrating neurons maintain their order in the queue; however, they reverse their position at the top of the queue upon completing radial migration. This inversion transforms the original order of the radial-migrating neurons into the characteristic “inside-out” organization of the upper cortical layers. Thus, the queue of the radial-migrating neurons is essential for proper formation of the cerebral cortex.Reelin and DSCAM collaborate at the dorsal border of the developing cortical plate. Reelin reduces cell adhesion on the top of the radial glia around the border of the cortical plate. This precise location ensures that the radial-migrating neurons detach at the uppermost region of the radial glia rather than within the cortical plate. The neurons stopping inside the cortical plate, therefore, will not detach. Migratory wild-type neurons arrive at the dorsal border of the cortical plate in a sequential manner. In the Dscam null allele mutant, the time-lapse imaging reveals that radial-migrating neurons can reach the dorsal border of the cortical plate (which is controlled by Reelin) simultaneously, but cluster at the same location. This results in denser and thinner upper cortical layers. These results indicate that reelin and DSCAM each act to ensure the formation of the “inside-out” cerebral cortex. However, how new positions are created within the emerging cortical layer for queued radial-migrating neurons is unclear. Although this process is crucial for regulating the pace of cerebral cortical morphogenesis. Neurons in many regions of the brain are generated in an ordered fashion from a pool of common progenitors. The ordered migration facilitated by genes such as Reln and Dscam may function to orchestrate an appropriate distribution of neurons.

The queue of radial-migrating neurons facilitates the “inside-out” morphogenesis of the cerebral cortex

Our previous research revealed that most following neurons bypass their leading neurons to enter the emerging cortical layers. However, for this to occur, it is essential that the leading neurons complete radial migration and detach from the radial glia, enabling the following neurons to advance and eventually bypass the post-migratory leading neurons. Migrating neurons maintain their order in the queue; however, they reverse their position at the top of the queue upon completing radial migration. This inversion transforms the original order of the radial-migrating neurons into the characteristic “inside-out” organization of the upper cortical layers. Thus, the queue of the radial-migrating neurons is essential for proper formation of the cerebral cortex.

Reelin and DSCAM collaborate at the dorsal border of the developing cortical plate. Reelin reduces cell adhesion on the top of the radial glia around the border of the cortical plate. This precise location ensures that the radial-migrating neurons detach at the uppermost region of the radial glia rather than within the cortical plate. The neurons stopping inside the cortical plate, therefore, will not detach. Migratory wild-type neurons arrive at the dorsal border of the cortical plate in a sequential manner. In the Dscam null allele mutant, the time-lapse imaging reveals that radial-migrating neurons can reach the dorsal border of the cortical plate (which is controlled by Reelin) simultaneously, but cluster at the same location. This results in denser and thinner upper cortical layers. These results indicate that reelin and DSCAM each act to ensure the formation of the “inside-out” cerebral cortex. However, how new positions are created within the emerging cortical layer for queued radial-migrating neurons is unclear. Although this process is crucial for regulating the pace of cerebral cortical morphogenesis. Neurons in many regions of the brain are generated in an ordered fashion from a pool of common progenitors. The ordered migration facilitated by genes such as Reln and Dscam may function to orchestrate an appropriate distribution of neurons.

DSCAM blocks the Cadherin-mediated adhesion to stop the radial migrationThe leading neuron hinders the radial migration of subsequent neurons by obstructing the expansion of the proximal cytoplasmic dilation of the leading process (PCDLP), which is necessary to initiate nucleokinesis. Once the leading neuron advances, it creates space for the following neuron to extend its PCDLP and trigger its nucleokinesis. F-actin assembly at the proximal end of the leading process and cell body is essential for expanding the PCDLP. We found that F-actin levels are low in the WT upper cortical plate. Radial-migrating neurons form queues in the upper cortical plate. The low level of F-actin in the leading process of the neurons is consistent with the low level of PCDLP expansion. These phenomena indicate the blockage of the PCDLP expansion in the WT UCP. In the Dscam null mutant, the F-actin was assembled in the upper cortical plate compared to wild type, offering an explanation for the high activity of PCDLP expansion in the Dscam null mutant. The F-actin results support the idea that DSCAM in the upper cortical plate blocks F-actin assembly and, thus, hinders the formation of PCDLP and nucleokinesis. A similar phenomenon has been reported in the mouse retina, where Dscam loss and gain of function studies link the protein to the refinement of dendrite sprouts during lamination. Our study here offers a molecular mechanism to explain the findings here and in earlier studies in retina.F-actin assembly relies on cadherin-mediated adhesion during lamellipodia extension and PCDLP expansion. Though previous studies demonstrated that DSCAM blocks Cadherin-mediated adhesion, the underlying mechanism remains unknown. Here, we cultured HeLa cells and overexpressed N-cadherin with or without DSCAM to assay the relationship between DSCAM and N-cadherin. We found that N-cadherin in HeLa cells formed cell-cell adhesion in the absence of DSCAM. Mature N-cadherin puncta zipped two N-cadherin+ HeLa cells together. Immature adhesion was also observed, where N-cadherin filopodia extended from both cellular cortices and formed connections. It indicates that N-cadherin filopodia need to be extended and connected before they form the mature N-cadherin puncta.We found that DSCAM-positive fibers were long and thin, extending from both cellular cortices and filling the space between the N-cadherin+ HeLa cells, forming a narrow cleft between N-cadherin+ HeLa cells. N-cadherin+ fibers were extended from both sides of the clefts. It indicates that DSCAM does not expel N-cadherin from the cleft. The N-cadherin fibers stay under the DSCAM-positive fibers and may not be able to contact each other. Thus, DSCAM fibers may interrupt the N-cadherin fibers’ transcellular interaction. DSCAM-positive fibers are needed from both sides of adjacent neurons to form connections, thus resulting in the blockage of N-cadherin fibers' contacts. DSCAM fiber trans interaction does not form tight cell connections or trigger F-actin assembly. How DSCAM-positive fibers affect the contacts of N-cadherin fibers is still unknown.DSCAM blocks the N-cadherin adhesion in the developing upper cortical plate. N-cadherin overexpression in WT brains does not cause cell-cell adhesion among the radial-migrating neurons in the upper cortical plate. Whether the levels of Dscam overexpression that occur in trisomy 21 have a similar impact is a logical next step to build on these findings. Meanwhile, N-cadherin induced clustering among radial-migrating neurons in Dscam−/− brains. Interestingly, individual migrating neurons are isolated from each other by narrow clefts and are evenly distributed in the developing upper cortical plate. While the radial-migrating neurons in DSCAM−/− brains clump together, the clefts between migrating neurons disappear. Similar phenomena, similar to those found in HeLa cells, were observed where DSCAM fibers fill the clefts to separate the individual WT radial-migrating neurons. Therefore, N-cadherin adhesion cannot be formed among the WT radial-migrating neurons. In Dscam null allele mutants, the migrating neurons become much closer than those in the WT cortical plate, with N-cadherin adhesion puncta covering the entire cell body and the leading process.This provides a deeper understanding of cortical layer development, which can shed light on the understanding of developmental disorders such as Down syndrome and Autism spectrum disorder.

DSCAM blocks the Cadherin-mediated adhesion to stop the radial migration

The leading neuron hinders the radial migration of subsequent neurons by obstructing the expansion of the proximal cytoplasmic dilation of the leading process (PCDLP), which is necessary to initiate nucleokinesis. Once the leading neuron advances, it creates space for the following neuron to extend its PCDLP and trigger its nucleokinesis. F-actin assembly at the proximal end of the leading process and cell body is essential for expanding the PCDLP. We found that F-actin levels are low in the WT upper cortical plate. Radial-migrating neurons form queues in the upper cortical plate. The low level of F-actin in the leading process of the neurons is consistent with the low level of PCDLP expansion. These phenomena indicate the blockage of the PCDLP expansion in the WT UCP. In the Dscam null mutant, the F-actin was assembled in the upper cortical plate compared to wild type, offering an explanation for the high activity of PCDLP expansion in the Dscam null mutant. The F-actin results support the idea that DSCAM in the upper cortical plate blocks F-actin assembly and, thus, hinders the formation of PCDLP and nucleokinesis. A similar phenomenon has been reported in the mouse retina, where Dscam loss and gain of function studies link the protein to the refinement of dendrite sprouts during lamination. Our study here offers a molecular mechanism to explain the findings here and in earlier studies in retina.

F-actin assembly relies on cadherin-mediated adhesion during lamellipodia extension and PCDLP expansion. Though previous studies demonstrated that DSCAM blocks Cadherin-mediated adhesion, the underlying mechanism remains unknown. Here, we cultured HeLa cells and overexpressed N-cadherin with or without DSCAM to assay the relationship between DSCAM and N-cadherin. We found that N-cadherin in HeLa cells formed cell-cell adhesion in the absence of DSCAM. Mature N-cadherin puncta zipped two N-cadherin+ HeLa cells together. Immature adhesion was also observed, where N-cadherin filopodia extended from both cellular cortices and formed connections. It indicates that N-cadherin filopodia need to be extended and connected before they form the mature N-cadherin puncta.

We found that DSCAM-positive fibers were long and thin, extending from both cellular cortices and filling the space between the N-cadherin+ HeLa cells, forming a narrow cleft between N-cadherin+ HeLa cells. N-cadherin+ fibers were extended from both sides of the clefts. It indicates that DSCAM does not expel N-cadherin from the cleft. The N-cadherin fibers stay under the DSCAM-positive fibers and may not be able to contact each other. Thus, DSCAM fibers may interrupt the N-cadherin fibers’ transcellular interaction. DSCAM-positive fibers are needed from both sides of adjacent neurons to form connections, thus resulting in the blockage of N-cadherin fibers' contacts. DSCAM fiber trans interaction does not form tight cell connections or trigger F-actin assembly. How DSCAM-positive fibers affect the contacts of N-cadherin fibers is still unknown.

DSCAM blocks the N-cadherin adhesion in the developing upper cortical plate. N-cadherin overexpression in WT brains does not cause cell-cell adhesion among the radial-migrating neurons in the upper cortical plate. Whether the levels of Dscam overexpression that occur in trisomy 21 have a similar impact is a logical next step to build on these findings. Meanwhile, N-cadherin induced clustering among radial-migrating neurons in Dscam−/− brains. Interestingly, individual migrating neurons are isolated from each other by narrow clefts and are evenly distributed in the developing upper cortical plate. While the radial-migrating neurons in DSCAM−/− brains clump together, the clefts between migrating neurons disappear. Similar phenomena, similar to those found in HeLa cells, were observed where DSCAM fibers fill the clefts to separate the individual WT radial-migrating neurons. Therefore, N-cadherin adhesion cannot be formed among the WT radial-migrating neurons. In Dscam null allele mutants, the migrating neurons become much closer than those in the WT cortical plate, with N-cadherin adhesion puncta covering the entire cell body and the leading process.

This provides a deeper understanding of cortical layer development, which can shed light on the understanding of developmental disorders such as Down syndrome and Autism spectrum disorder.

MATERIAL AND METHODSMice and genotypingIn this study, we used Dscam2j/2j mutant mice[26] for loss-of-function studies and time-lapse imaging of DSCAM. Dscam2j/2j mutant mice do not make a protein product of Dscam. The Dscam2j mutation contains a 4-base-pair duplication in exon 19 of Dscam, leading to a frameshift during translation. Dscam2j/2j mutant mice cannot give birth to offspring. To overcome the breeding barrio, Dscam2j/+ mice (hereon referred to as Dscam+/−) were bred to generate wild-type (Dscam+/+), heterozygotes (Dscam+/−), and mutants (Dscam−/−). The nestin-CreERT2 mouse expresses tamoxifen-induced Cre recombinase under the nestin promoter in the neural progenitor cells (NPCs) during cortical development. The Ai14 mouse expresses tdTomato, a red fluorescent protein, in a Cre-dependent manner. Dscam+/− mice were bred into nestin-CreERT2 and Ai14 mice to generate DSCAM−/−/nestin-CreERT2/CAG-tdTomato progeny with tamoxifen-inducible nestin-promoter-restricted tdTomato expression in NPCs. tdTomato expression was induced by a dose of tamoxifen injection into dams bearing E14.5 embryos in the NPCs. To determine whether DSCAM has the cell-autonomous function for the maintenance of the queue of radial-migrating neurons, Dscamflox (Dscamf/+) mice (Stock No. 17689[37]) were bred to generate heterozygotes (Dscamf/+) and homozygotes (Dscamf/f) offspring. So, in a normal DSCAM background, cre over-expression plasmids can be transfected with in-utero electroporation into the neural progenitor cells to induce DSCAM knock-out in heterozygotes (Dscamf/+ w/ cre) or homozygotes (Dscamf/f w/ cre) in the offspring pyramidal neurons of these neural progenitor cells.The genomic DNA of embryos was purified for genotyping. Embryonic tail tissues were digested in 300 μL TES buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 0.5% SDS, 0.1 M EDTA, in 1X PBS) with proteinase K at 37 °C overnight, followed by addition of 160-200 μL 5 M NaCl. Samples were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm to remove the precipitates. 200 μL pure isopropanol was added to 300 μL supernatant to precipitate the DNA. The DNA pellets were washed with 500 μL 75% ethanol before being dissolved in 20 μL ultra-pure water. DNA surrounding the DSCAM2j mutation was amplified with PCR (forward primer: 5'-gccctgtggtatttgctggtgtg-3'; reverse primer: 5'-Gatgggcaaatgtcaaaggtcaaa-3'). The PCR products of DSCAM2j offspring were sequenced with either primer to determine the presence of the 4-base-pair insertion. The PCR genotyping for Dscamflox mice was performed with primers (forward primer:5’-agcaaaagcaccatgattgacag-3’ and reverse primer: 5’-caactgacttaatgagtggag-3’).All animal handling was in accordance with the policy and guidance of the Institutional Animal Care & Use Committee (IACUC) at the University of Michigan and the protocol approved by the IACUC. All the mice were in a dedicated temperature-controlled (20°C) animal vivarium with a 12-hour light/dark cycle.PlasmidsTo make the N-cadherin-EGFP expressible in radial-migrating neurons, N-cadherin-EGFP was excised with NheI (blunt end) and NotI (sticky end) from pCMV-N-cadherin-EGFP (Addgene, plasmid#18870) and subsequently inserted into the PB-CAG plasmid to generate PB-CAG-N-cadherin-EGFP. For the fusion of N-cadherin with 2XTagBFP2, 2XTagBFP2 was excised from pCMV-2XTagBFP2 with SmaI and NotI, replacing the EGFP in PB-CAG-N-cadherin-EGFP to produce PB-CAG-N-cadherin-2XTagBFP2. To create a DSCAM and mNeonGreen fusion protein, DSCAM was excised from pCMV-mouse-DSCAM (Addgene, plasmid#18737) with EcoRI and XhoI and then inserted into pCS2-mNeonGreen plasmid. To overexpress DSCAM-mNeonGreen in migrating neurons, DSCAM-mNeonGreen was excised from pCS2-DSCAM-mNeonGreen using EcoRI and NotI and inserted into the PB-CAG vector, creating pCAG-DSCAM-mNeonGreen.In-utero electroporation (IUE) of mouse embryosIUE was performed as previously described[13, 41]. The pregnant dam mouse (E14.5) was anesthetized with isoflurane, and an incision was made to expose the embryos in the uterus. Plasmid solution (~1μg/μl) containing 0.01% w/v Fast Green dye was injected into one of the lateral ventricles with a glass micropipette. Each embryo head in the uterus was placed between the leads of a Tweezertrode Electrode system (5 mm in diameter, BTX, Harvard Bioscience) and administered five electrical pulses (50 V, 50 ms duration, 950 ms intervals) using an electroporator (ECM830, Harvard Bioscience). Then, the embryos were returned to the abdominal cavity. The muscle and skin were sutured, respectively. The pregnant dam was administered carprofen (5 mg/kg, i.p.) for pain management and was monitored till revived.Live-cell time-lapse confocal microscopy of brain sectionsBrain slice culture and time-lapse confocal imaging were carefully described in our 2023 Bio-protocol paper[42]. Briefly, embryonic brains were coronally sectioned in ice-cold artificial cerebrospinal fluid on a vibratome (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) into 300 μm slices. Brain slices were then mounted in ice-cold Matrigel and solidified in a 37°C incubator for 30 minutes. Then, the brain slice was continuously perfused with DMEM bubbled with a gas mix (95% O2, 5% CO2) at 37°C on the microscope stage. Time-lapse imaging was performed using the Leica TCS SP5 confocal microscope with an HC Fluotar L 25x/0.95 W VISIR immersion objective lens every 5 minutes. After the time-lapse imaging, the embryos were genotyped as described above.Fluorescence staining and immunohistochemistry of brain sectionsBrains were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in 1XPBS overnight. Then, brains were kept in 30% sucrose overnight, then embedded in optimal cutting temperature (O.C.T.) media (Tissue-Tek™, Sakura), and frozen at −80 °C. Brains were sectioned coronally at 50 μm thickness, permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100 in 1XPBS, blocked with 2% normal donkey serum in 1XPBS with 0.2% Triton X-100, and incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibody or phalloidin in 1XPBS with 2% normal donkey serum and 0.2% Triton X-100 inside. The antibodies and dyes used are: (i) mouse anti-N-cadherin antibody (1:100, GC-4 clone, Sigma, C3865), and (ii) Phalloidin-647 (1:500, Abcam, Ab176759). Sections were rinsed and probed with secondary antibodies against mouse antibodies (1:500, Jackson ImmunoResearch). The brain sections were then counterstained with DAPI or NucRed Live 647 (1:1000, Invitrogen, R37106), rinsed, and mounted in 50% glycerol before visualization. Images were captured using a Leica SP5 confocal microscope.In-situ hybridization (ISH) on E19 brain sectionsDscam mRNA ISH was performed using published probe sequences. Probe sequences were amplified from Dscam cDNA [catalog no. 18737, Addgene] and sub-cloned into a pTOPO vector. DIG-labeled cRNA probes were generated with a DIG RNA labeling kit (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), as previously described. DIG-labeled cRNA probes were produced by in vitro transcription from the Dscam cDNA template. ISH was conducted on fresh-frozen mouse brain sections attached to microscope slides, which were fixed and permeabilized with proteinase K. The sections were then incubated with DIG-labeled cRNA probes, rinsed, and incubated with the anti-DIG-AP (alkaline phosphatase) antibody (Roche). The signal was detected under an AP substrate NBT/BCIP (Roche).HeLa cell culture and transfectionHeLa cells were cultured in DMEM with 10% FBS in a humidified cell culture hood at 37 °C and 5% CO2. For transfection and imaging, HeLa cells were cultured on the coverslips coated with poly-D-lysine. N-cadherin-GFP [1.5 μg plasmid; catalog no. 18870, Addgene] or N-cadherin-2XTag-BFP2 (1.5 μg plasmid)/DSCAM-mNeonGreen (0.5 μg plasmid) were transfected, respectively, with Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific) into HeLa cells. Transfected HeLa cells were incubated in a humidified cell culture hood at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for 2 days before fixation and imaging. Then, the HeLa cells were fixed on the coverslip with 4% paraformaldehyde, counterstained with Reddot (infrared), and mounted on a glass slide for imaging under the Leica SP5 confocal microscope.Statistical AnalysisData were analyzed with GraphPad Prism 8. The types of statistical tests are shown in the Figure Legends. All experiments were quantified in a double-blind manner, ensuring that the person quantifying the images was unaware of the genotypes or transfection plasmids.

MATERIAL AND METHODS

Mice and genotypingIn this study, we used Dscam2j/2j mutant mice[26] for loss-of-function studies and time-lapse imaging of DSCAM. Dscam2j/2j mutant mice do not make a protein product of Dscam. The Dscam2j mutation contains a 4-base-pair duplication in exon 19 of Dscam, leading to a frameshift during translation. Dscam2j/2j mutant mice cannot give birth to offspring. To overcome the breeding barrio, Dscam2j/+ mice (hereon referred to as Dscam+/−) were bred to generate wild-type (Dscam+/+), heterozygotes (Dscam+/−), and mutants (Dscam−/−). The nestin-CreERT2 mouse expresses tamoxifen-induced Cre recombinase under the nestin promoter in the neural progenitor cells (NPCs) during cortical development. The Ai14 mouse expresses tdTomato, a red fluorescent protein, in a Cre-dependent manner. Dscam+/− mice were bred into nestin-CreERT2 and Ai14 mice to generate DSCAM−/−/nestin-CreERT2/CAG-tdTomato progeny with tamoxifen-inducible nestin-promoter-restricted tdTomato expression in NPCs. tdTomato expression was induced by a dose of tamoxifen injection into dams bearing E14.5 embryos in the NPCs. To determine whether DSCAM has the cell-autonomous function for the maintenance of the queue of radial-migrating neurons, Dscamflox (Dscamf/+) mice (Stock No. 17689[37]) were bred to generate heterozygotes (Dscamf/+) and homozygotes (Dscamf/f) offspring. So, in a normal DSCAM background, cre over-expression plasmids can be transfected with in-utero electroporation into the neural progenitor cells to induce DSCAM knock-out in heterozygotes (Dscamf/+ w/ cre) or homozygotes (Dscamf/f w/ cre) in the offspring pyramidal neurons of these neural progenitor cells.The genomic DNA of embryos was purified for genotyping. Embryonic tail tissues were digested in 300 μL TES buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 0.5% SDS, 0.1 M EDTA, in 1X PBS) with proteinase K at 37 °C overnight, followed by addition of 160-200 μL 5 M NaCl. Samples were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm to remove the precipitates. 200 μL pure isopropanol was added to 300 μL supernatant to precipitate the DNA. The DNA pellets were washed with 500 μL 75% ethanol before being dissolved in 20 μL ultra-pure water. DNA surrounding the DSCAM2j mutation was amplified with PCR (forward primer: 5'-gccctgtggtatttgctggtgtg-3'; reverse primer: 5'-Gatgggcaaatgtcaaaggtcaaa-3'). The PCR products of DSCAM2j offspring were sequenced with either primer to determine the presence of the 4-base-pair insertion. The PCR genotyping for Dscamflox mice was performed with primers (forward primer:5’-agcaaaagcaccatgattgacag-3’ and reverse primer: 5’-caactgacttaatgagtggag-3’).All animal handling was in accordance with the policy and guidance of the Institutional Animal Care & Use Committee (IACUC) at the University of Michigan and the protocol approved by the IACUC. All the mice were in a dedicated temperature-controlled (20°C) animal vivarium with a 12-hour light/dark cycle.

Mice and genotyping

In this study, we used Dscam2j/2j mutant mice[26] for loss-of-function studies and time-lapse imaging of DSCAM. Dscam2j/2j mutant mice do not make a protein product of Dscam. The Dscam2j mutation contains a 4-base-pair duplication in exon 19 of Dscam, leading to a frameshift during translation. Dscam2j/2j mutant mice cannot give birth to offspring. To overcome the breeding barrio, Dscam2j/+ mice (hereon referred to as Dscam+/−) were bred to generate wild-type (Dscam+/+), heterozygotes (Dscam+/−), and mutants (Dscam−/−). The nestin-CreERT2 mouse expresses tamoxifen-induced Cre recombinase under the nestin promoter in the neural progenitor cells (NPCs) during cortical development. The Ai14 mouse expresses tdTomato, a red fluorescent protein, in a Cre-dependent manner. Dscam+/− mice were bred into nestin-CreERT2 and Ai14 mice to generate DSCAM−/−/nestin-CreERT2/CAG-tdTomato progeny with tamoxifen-inducible nestin-promoter-restricted tdTomato expression in NPCs. tdTomato expression was induced by a dose of tamoxifen injection into dams bearing E14.5 embryos in the NPCs. To determine whether DSCAM has the cell-autonomous function for the maintenance of the queue of radial-migrating neurons, Dscamflox (Dscamf/+) mice (Stock No. 17689[37]) were bred to generate heterozygotes (Dscamf/+) and homozygotes (Dscamf/f) offspring. So, in a normal DSCAM background, cre over-expression plasmids can be transfected with in-utero electroporation into the neural progenitor cells to induce DSCAM knock-out in heterozygotes (Dscamf/+ w/ cre) or homozygotes (Dscamf/f w/ cre) in the offspring pyramidal neurons of these neural progenitor cells.

The genomic DNA of embryos was purified for genotyping. Embryonic tail tissues were digested in 300 μL TES buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 0.5% SDS, 0.1 M EDTA, in 1X PBS) with proteinase K at 37 °C overnight, followed by addition of 160-200 μL 5 M NaCl. Samples were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm to remove the precipitates. 200 μL pure isopropanol was added to 300 μL supernatant to precipitate the DNA. The DNA pellets were washed with 500 μL 75% ethanol before being dissolved in 20 μL ultra-pure water. DNA surrounding the DSCAM2j mutation was amplified with PCR (forward primer: 5'-gccctgtggtatttgctggtgtg-3'; reverse primer: 5'-Gatgggcaaatgtcaaaggtcaaa-3'). The PCR products of DSCAM2j offspring were sequenced with either primer to determine the presence of the 4-base-pair insertion. The PCR genotyping for Dscamflox mice was performed with primers (forward primer:5’-agcaaaagcaccatgattgacag-3’ and reverse primer: 5’-caactgacttaatgagtggag-3’).

All animal handling was in accordance with the policy and guidance of the Institutional Animal Care & Use Committee (IACUC) at the University of Michigan and the protocol approved by the IACUC. All the mice were in a dedicated temperature-controlled (20°C) animal vivarium with a 12-hour light/dark cycle.

PlasmidsTo make the N-cadherin-EGFP expressible in radial-migrating neurons, N-cadherin-EGFP was excised with NheI (blunt end) and NotI (sticky end) from pCMV-N-cadherin-EGFP (Addgene, plasmid#18870) and subsequently inserted into the PB-CAG plasmid to generate PB-CAG-N-cadherin-EGFP. For the fusion of N-cadherin with 2XTagBFP2, 2XTagBFP2 was excised from pCMV-2XTagBFP2 with SmaI and NotI, replacing the EGFP in PB-CAG-N-cadherin-EGFP to produce PB-CAG-N-cadherin-2XTagBFP2. To create a DSCAM and mNeonGreen fusion protein, DSCAM was excised from pCMV-mouse-DSCAM (Addgene, plasmid#18737) with EcoRI and XhoI and then inserted into pCS2-mNeonGreen plasmid. To overexpress DSCAM-mNeonGreen in migrating neurons, DSCAM-mNeonGreen was excised from pCS2-DSCAM-mNeonGreen using EcoRI and NotI and inserted into the PB-CAG vector, creating pCAG-DSCAM-mNeonGreen.

To make the N-cadherin-EGFP expressible in radial-migrating neurons, N-cadherin-EGFP was excised with NheI (blunt end) and NotI (sticky end) from pCMV-N-cadherin-EGFP (Addgene, plasmid#18870) and subsequently inserted into the PB-CAG plasmid to generate PB-CAG-N-cadherin-EGFP. For the fusion of N-cadherin with 2XTagBFP2, 2XTagBFP2 was excised from pCMV-2XTagBFP2 with SmaI and NotI, replacing the EGFP in PB-CAG-N-cadherin-EGFP to produce PB-CAG-N-cadherin-2XTagBFP2. To create a DSCAM and mNeonGreen fusion protein, DSCAM was excised from pCMV-mouse-DSCAM (Addgene, plasmid#18737) with EcoRI and XhoI and then inserted into pCS2-mNeonGreen plasmid. To overexpress DSCAM-mNeonGreen in migrating neurons, DSCAM-mNeonGreen was excised from pCS2-DSCAM-mNeonGreen using EcoRI and NotI and inserted into the PB-CAG vector, creating pCAG-DSCAM-mNeonGreen.

In-utero electroporation (IUE) of mouse embryosIUE was performed as previously described[13, 41]. The pregnant dam mouse (E14.5) was anesthetized with isoflurane, and an incision was made to expose the embryos in the uterus. Plasmid solution (~1μg/μl) containing 0.01% w/v Fast Green dye was injected into one of the lateral ventricles with a glass micropipette. Each embryo head in the uterus was placed between the leads of a Tweezertrode Electrode system (5 mm in diameter, BTX, Harvard Bioscience) and administered five electrical pulses (50 V, 50 ms duration, 950 ms intervals) using an electroporator (ECM830, Harvard Bioscience). Then, the embryos were returned to the abdominal cavity. The muscle and skin were sutured, respectively. The pregnant dam was administered carprofen (5 mg/kg, i.p.) for pain management and was monitored till revived.

In-utero electroporation (IUE) of mouse embryos

IUE was performed as previously described[13, 41]. The pregnant dam mouse (E14.5) was anesthetized with isoflurane, and an incision was made to expose the embryos in the uterus. Plasmid solution (~1μg/μl) containing 0.01% w/v Fast Green dye was injected into one of the lateral ventricles with a glass micropipette. Each embryo head in the uterus was placed between the leads of a Tweezertrode Electrode system (5 mm in diameter, BTX, Harvard Bioscience) and administered five electrical pulses (50 V, 50 ms duration, 950 ms intervals) using an electroporator (ECM830, Harvard Bioscience). Then, the embryos were returned to the abdominal cavity. The muscle and skin were sutured, respectively. The pregnant dam was administered carprofen (5 mg/kg, i.p.) for pain management and was monitored till revived.

Live-cell time-lapse confocal microscopy of brain sectionsBrain slice culture and time-lapse confocal imaging were carefully described in our 2023 Bio-protocol paper[42]. Briefly, embryonic brains were coronally sectioned in ice-cold artificial cerebrospinal fluid on a vibratome (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) into 300 μm slices. Brain slices were then mounted in ice-cold Matrigel and solidified in a 37°C incubator for 30 minutes. Then, the brain slice was continuously perfused with DMEM bubbled with a gas mix (95% O2, 5% CO2) at 37°C on the microscope stage. Time-lapse imaging was performed using the Leica TCS SP5 confocal microscope with an HC Fluotar L 25x/0.95 W VISIR immersion objective lens every 5 minutes. After the time-lapse imaging, the embryos were genotyped as described above.

Live-cell time-lapse confocal microscopy of brain sections

Brain slice culture and time-lapse confocal imaging were carefully described in our 2023 Bio-protocol paper[42]. Briefly, embryonic brains were coronally sectioned in ice-cold artificial cerebrospinal fluid on a vibratome (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) into 300 μm slices. Brain slices were then mounted in ice-cold Matrigel and solidified in a 37°C incubator for 30 minutes. Then, the brain slice was continuously perfused with DMEM bubbled with a gas mix (95% O2, 5% CO2) at 37°C on the microscope stage. Time-lapse imaging was performed using the Leica TCS SP5 confocal microscope with an HC Fluotar L 25x/0.95 W VISIR immersion objective lens every 5 minutes. After the time-lapse imaging, the embryos were genotyped as described above.

Fluorescence staining and immunohistochemistry of brain sectionsBrains were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in 1XPBS overnight. Then, brains were kept in 30% sucrose overnight, then embedded in optimal cutting temperature (O.C.T.) media (Tissue-Tek™, Sakura), and frozen at −80 °C. Brains were sectioned coronally at 50 μm thickness, permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100 in 1XPBS, blocked with 2% normal donkey serum in 1XPBS with 0.2% Triton X-100, and incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibody or phalloidin in 1XPBS with 2% normal donkey serum and 0.2% Triton X-100 inside. The antibodies and dyes used are: (i) mouse anti-N-cadherin antibody (1:100, GC-4 clone, Sigma, C3865), and (ii) Phalloidin-647 (1:500, Abcam, Ab176759). Sections were rinsed and probed with secondary antibodies against mouse antibodies (1:500, Jackson ImmunoResearch). The brain sections were then counterstained with DAPI or NucRed Live 647 (1:1000, Invitrogen, R37106), rinsed, and mounted in 50% glycerol before visualization. Images were captured using a Leica SP5 confocal microscope.

Fluorescence staining and immunohistochemistry of brain sections

Brains were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in 1XPBS overnight. Then, brains were kept in 30% sucrose overnight, then embedded in optimal cutting temperature (O.C.T.) media (Tissue-Tek™, Sakura), and frozen at −80 °C. Brains were sectioned coronally at 50 μm thickness, permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100 in 1XPBS, blocked with 2% normal donkey serum in 1XPBS with 0.2% Triton X-100, and incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibody or phalloidin in 1XPBS with 2% normal donkey serum and 0.2% Triton X-100 inside. The antibodies and dyes used are: (i) mouse anti-N-cadherin antibody (1:100, GC-4 clone, Sigma, C3865), and (ii) Phalloidin-647 (1:500, Abcam, Ab176759). Sections were rinsed and probed with secondary antibodies against mouse antibodies (1:500, Jackson ImmunoResearch). The brain sections were then counterstained with DAPI or NucRed Live 647 (1:1000, Invitrogen, R37106), rinsed, and mounted in 50% glycerol before visualization. Images were captured using a Leica SP5 confocal microscope.

In-situ hybridization (ISH) on E19 brain sectionsDscam mRNA ISH was performed using published probe sequences. Probe sequences were amplified from Dscam cDNA [catalog no. 18737, Addgene] and sub-cloned into a pTOPO vector. DIG-labeled cRNA probes were generated with a DIG RNA labeling kit (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), as previously described. DIG-labeled cRNA probes were produced by in vitro transcription from the Dscam cDNA template. ISH was conducted on fresh-frozen mouse brain sections attached to microscope slides, which were fixed and permeabilized with proteinase K. The sections were then incubated with DIG-labeled cRNA probes, rinsed, and incubated with the anti-DIG-AP (alkaline phosphatase) antibody (Roche). The signal was detected under an AP substrate NBT/BCIP (Roche).

In-situ hybridization (ISH) on E19 brain sections

Dscam mRNA ISH was performed using published probe sequences. Probe sequences were amplified from Dscam cDNA [catalog no. 18737, Addgene] and sub-cloned into a pTOPO vector. DIG-labeled cRNA probes were generated with a DIG RNA labeling kit (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), as previously described. DIG-labeled cRNA probes were produced by in vitro transcription from the Dscam cDNA template. ISH was conducted on fresh-frozen mouse brain sections attached to microscope slides, which were fixed and permeabilized with proteinase K. The sections were then incubated with DIG-labeled cRNA probes, rinsed, and incubated with the anti-DIG-AP (alkaline phosphatase) antibody (Roche). The signal was detected under an AP substrate NBT/BCIP (Roche).

HeLa cell culture and transfectionHeLa cells were cultured in DMEM with 10% FBS in a humidified cell culture hood at 37 °C and 5% CO2. For transfection and imaging, HeLa cells were cultured on the coverslips coated with poly-D-lysine. N-cadherin-GFP [1.5 μg plasmid; catalog no. 18870, Addgene] or N-cadherin-2XTag-BFP2 (1.5 μg plasmid)/DSCAM-mNeonGreen (0.5 μg plasmid) were transfected, respectively, with Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific) into HeLa cells. Transfected HeLa cells were incubated in a humidified cell culture hood at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for 2 days before fixation and imaging. Then, the HeLa cells were fixed on the coverslip with 4% paraformaldehyde, counterstained with Reddot (infrared), and mounted on a glass slide for imaging under the Leica SP5 confocal microscope.

HeLa cell culture and transfection

HeLa cells were cultured in DMEM with 10% FBS in a humidified cell culture hood at 37 °C and 5% CO2. For transfection and imaging, HeLa cells were cultured on the coverslips coated with poly-D-lysine. N-cadherin-GFP [1.5 μg plasmid; catalog no. 18870, Addgene] or N-cadherin-2XTag-BFP2 (1.5 μg plasmid)/DSCAM-mNeonGreen (0.5 μg plasmid) were transfected, respectively, with Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific) into HeLa cells. Transfected HeLa cells were incubated in a humidified cell culture hood at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for 2 days before fixation and imaging. Then, the HeLa cells were fixed on the coverslip with 4% paraformaldehyde, counterstained with Reddot (infrared), and mounted on a glass slide for imaging under the Leica SP5 confocal microscope.

Statistical AnalysisData were analyzed with GraphPad Prism 8. The types of statistical tests are shown in the Figure Legends. All experiments were quantified in a double-blind manner, ensuring that the person quantifying the images was unaware of the genotypes or transfection plasmids.

Statistical Analysis

Data were analyzed with GraphPad Prism 8. The types of statistical tests are shown in the Figure Legends. All experiments were quantified in a double-blind manner, ensuring that the person quantifying the images was unaware of the genotypes or transfection plasmids.
