---
pmid: '17851526'
title: Dscam diversity is essential for neuronal wiring and self-recognition.
authors:
- Hattori D
- Demir E
- Kim HW
- Viragh E
- Zipursky SL
- Dickson BJ
journal: Nature
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC2691715
doi: 10.1038/nature06099
---

# Dscam diversity is essential for neuronal wiring and self-recognition.
**Authors:** Hattori D, Demir E, Kim HW, Viragh E, Zipursky SL, Dickson BJ
**Journal:** Nature (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature06099](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06099)
**PMC:** [PMC2691715](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2691715/)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2007 Sep 13;449(7159):223-7. doi: 10.1038/nature06099.

Dscam diversity is essential for neuronal wiring and self-recognition.

Hattori D(1), Demir E, Kim HW, Viragh E, Zipursky SL, Dickson BJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, David 
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
California 90049, USA.

Neurons are thought to use diverse families of cell-surface molecules for cell 
recognition during circuit assembly. In Drosophila, alternative splicing of the 
Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule (Dscam) gene potentially generates 38,016 
closely related transmembrane proteins of the immunoglobulin superfamily, each 
comprising one of 19,008 alternative ectodomains linked to one of two 
alternative transmembrane segments. These ectodomains show isoform-specific 
homophilic binding, leading to speculation that Dscam proteins mediate cell 
recognition. Genetic studies have established that Dscam is required for neural 
circuit assembly, but the extent to which isoform diversity contributes to this 
process is not known. Here we provide conclusive evidence that Dscam diversity 
is essential for circuit assembly. Using homologous recombination, we reduced 
the entire repertoire of Dscam ectodomains to just a single isoform. Neural 
circuits in these mutants are severely disorganized. Furthermore, we show that 
it is crucial for neighbouring neurons to express distinct isoforms, but that 
the specific identity of the isoforms expressed in an individual neuron is 
unimportant. We conclude that Dscam diversity provides each neuron with a unique 
identity by which it can distinguish its own processes from those of other 
neurons, and that this self-recognition is essential for wiring the Drosophila 
brain.

DOI: 10.1038/nature06099
PMCID: PMC2691715
PMID: 17851526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Neurons are thought to use diverse families of cell-surface molecules for cell recognition during circuit assembly. In Drosophila , alternative splicing of the Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule ( Dscam ) gene potentially generates 38,016 closely related trans-membrane proteins of the immunoglobulin superfamily, each comprising one of 19,008 alternative ectodomains linked to one of two alternative transmembrane segments 1 . These ectodomains show isoform-specific homophilic binding, leading to speculation that Dscam proteins mediate cell recognition 2 . Genetic studies have established that Dscam is required for neural circuit assembly 1 , 3 - 10 , but the extent to which isoform diversity contributes to this process is not known. Here we provide conclusive evidence that Dscam diversity is essential for circuit assembly. Using homologous recombination, we reduced the entire repertoire of Dscam ectodo-mains to just a single isoform. Neural circuits in these mutants are severely disorganized. Furthermore, we show that it is crucial for neighbouring neurons to express distinct isoforms, but that the specific identity of the isoforms expressed in an individual neuron is unimportant. We conclude that Dscam diversity provides each neuron with a unique identity by which it can distinguish its own processes from those of other neurons, and that this self-recognition is essential for wiring the Drosophila brain.

METHODS SUMMARY

The strategy used to generate the Dscam single and Dscam FRT alleles is indicated in Supplementary Fig. 1 , and is based on the ends-in targeting strategy detailed in ref. 25 . Three isoforms were selected essentially at random from sequenced cDNAs, with the only criterion being to select three distinct variants for each of exons 4, 6, and 9. Biochemical and molecular characterization of these alleles were peformed as described previously 2 , 7 , 8 . For survival analysis, each Dscam mutant animal was genotyped at first to second instar larval stages using kruppel –GFP, CyO balancer, and then transferred to fresh grape plates with a thin spread of yeast paste and raised at room temperature (∼22–25 °C). Independently isolated alleles harbouring the same isoform were used to generate homozygous Dscam single animals to avoid effects from potential second site mutations. Embryonic ventral nerve cords were immunostained as described previously 7 . For other analyses, animals that survived until late pupal stage were used. Immunostainings of pupal or adult brains were performed as described previously 6 , 7 . For intragenic MARCM analysis, clones were generated by inducing heat-shock-mediated expression of FLP recombinase at late larval to early pupal stages. Heat-shock was carried out at 37 °C for 1 h. Dscam null mutant clones were generated using conventional MARCM as previously described 7 .
