---
pmid: '37635165'
title: New Mouse Models of Roux-en Y Gastric Bypass and One Anastomosis Gastric Bypass
  for Type 2 Diabetes.
authors:
- Yu J
- Zhang H
- Liu Q
- Li H
- Wu L
- Qi T
- Song Z
- Huang H
- He J
- Ding Y
journal: Obes Surg
year: '2023'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC11376817
doi: 10.1007/s11695-023-06768-z
---

# New Mouse Models of Roux-en Y Gastric Bypass and One Anastomosis Gastric Bypass for Type 2 Diabetes.
**Authors:** Yu J, Zhang H, Liu Q, Li H, Wu L, Qi T, Song Z, Huang H, He J, Ding Y
**Journal:** Obes Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11695-023-06768-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11695-023-06768-z)
**PMC:** [PMC11376817](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11376817/)

## Abstract

1. Obes Surg. 2023 Oct;33(10):3163-3176. doi: 10.1007/s11695-023-06768-z. Epub
2023  Aug 27.

New Mouse Models of Roux-en Y Gastric Bypass and One Anastomosis Gastric Bypass 
for Type 2 Diabetes.

Yu J(1), Zhang H(#)(2)(3), Liu Q(#)(4), Li H(#)(5), Wu L(5), Qi T(5), Song Z(6), 
Huang H(5), He J(5), Ding Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, 510280, People's Republic of China. 
yujinlong640506@163.com.
(2)Southern Medical University School of Laboratory Medicine and Biotechnology, 
Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, 510280, People's Republic of China. 
zhangwater@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Basic Medical Research, General Hospital of Southern Theater 
Command of PLA, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, 510280, People's Republic of 
China. zhangwater@hotmail.com.
(4)Department of General Surgery, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, 510280, People's Republic of China.
(5)Surgical Center for Obesity and Diabetes, Jinshazhou Hospital, Guangzhou 
University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, 510282, People's 
Republic of China.
(6)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, 510280, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Obes Surg. 2023 Oct;33(10):3177. doi: 10.1007/s11695-023-06809-7.

BACKGROUND: Current bariatric surgery models primarily utilize mice with 
obesity, overlooking those with type 2 diabetes (T2DM). These models have 
limitations in replicating clinical procedures accurately and achieving broad 
applicability. This study aimed to develop novel mouse models of Roux-en-Y 
gastric bypass (RYGB) and one anastomosis gastric bypass (OAGB) surgeries 
specifically designed for T2DM research, utilizing simplified surgical 
techniques closely resembling clinical procedures.
METHODS: Eight-week-old C57/Bl6 mice, except for the Blank-Control group, were 
induced with T2DM by combining a high-fat diet and streptozotocin injection. 
RYGB involved creating a 10% gastric pouch, a 4-cm biliopancreatic limb (BL), 
and a 4-cm Roux limb (RL). Similarly, OAGB maintained a 10% gastric pouch and a 
4-cm BL. To assess the efficacy of these models, we measured the body weight and 
fasting blood glucose (FBG) and conducted intraperitoneal glucose tolerance test 
(IPGTT), insulin tolerance test (ITT), and liver B-ultrasound, as well as a 
histopathological analysis of multiple organs 12 weeks post-operation.
RESULTS: The survival rates in the Blank-Control, T2DM-Sham, T2DM-RYGB, and 
T2DM-OAGB groups were 100% (6/6), 100% (6/6), 85.7% (6/7), and 100% (6/6), 
respectively. Both RYGB and OAGB surgeries similarly led to sustained weight 
loss, reduced the FBG levels, improved the IPGTT and ITT results, and alleviated 
the histopathological manifestations in multiple organs.
CONCLUSION: The innovative mouse models of RYGB and OAGB surgeries effectively 
improve T2DM. Both surgeries demonstrate comparable efficacy in ameliorating 
T2DM, even when utilizing a gastric pouch of the same size and the same length 
of BL in OAGB.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11695-023-06768-z
PMID: 37635165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

One-anastomosis gastric bypass (OAGB) has gained importance as a simple, safe, and effective operation to treat morbid obesity. We previously found that Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery with a long compared with a short biliopancreatic limb (BPL) leads to improved weight loss and glucose tolerance in obese mice. However, it is not known whether a long BPL in OAGB surgery also results in beneficial metabolic outcomes. Five-week-old male C57BL/6J mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD) for 8 weeks underwent OAGB surgery with defined BPL lengths (5.5 cm distally of the duodenojejunal junction for short and 9.5 cm for long BPL), or sham surgery combined with caloric restriction. Weight loss, glucose tolerance, obesity-related comorbidities, endocrine effects, gut microbiota, and bile acids were assessed. Total weight loss was independent of the length of the BPL after OAGB surgery. However, a long BPL was associated with lower glucose-stimulated insulin on day 14 , and an improved glucose tolerance on day 35 after surgery. Moreover, a long BPL resulted in reduced total cholesterol, while there were no differences in the resolution of metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) and adipose tissue inflammation. Tendencies of an attenuated hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and aldosterone were present in the long BPL group. With both the short and long BPL, we found an increase in primary conjugated bile acids (pronounced in long BPL) along with a loss in bacterial Desulfovibrionaceae and Erysipelotrichaceae and simultaneous increase in Akkermansiaceae , Sutterellaceae , and Enterobacteriaceae . In summary, OAGB surgery with a long compared with a short BPL led to similar weight loss, but improved glucose metabolism, lipid, and endocrine outcomes in obese mice, potentially mediated through changes in gut microbiota and related bile acids. Tailoring the BPL length in humans might help to optimize metabolic outcomes after bariatric surgery.

NEW & NOTEWORTHY Weight loss following OAGB surgery in obese mice was not influenced by BPL length, but a longer BPL was associated with improved metabolic outcomes, including glucose and lipid homeostasis. These changes could be mediated by bile acids upon altered gut microbiota. Further validation of these findings is required through a randomized human study.

INTRODUCTION

Metabolic syndrome refers to a constellation of metabolic abnormalities including glucose intolerance, insulin resistance, central obesity, dyslipidemia, and hypertension ( 1 ). Due to the increasing prevalence of obesity, the incidence of metabolic syndrome is rising worldwide ( 2 ). To date, bariatric surgery has been proven to be the most effective treatment for morbid obesity and obesity-associated comorbidities ( 3 , 4 ). In addition, it has been associated with longer life expectancy than usual obesity care ( 5 ).

Besides Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) and sleeve gastrectomy, one-anastomosis gastric bypass (OAGB; also omega loop gastric bypass or mini-gastric bypass) is the third most performed bariatric procedure worldwide. Conceived in 1997 ( 6 ), OAGB has gained increasing popularity due to its technical simplicity and its promising outcomes regarding weight loss and remission of obesity-related comorbidities, which demonstrated non-inferiority when compared with the current gold standard RYGB ( 7 , 8 ).

Optimizing weight loss and metabolic outcomes by tailoring the limb lengths has been proposed for both RYGB as well as OAGB surgery. Different limb lengths in OAGB have been proposed to achieve a balance between metabolic outcomes and nutritional deficiencies ( 9 – 11 ). Although a long bypassed, biliopancreatic limb (BPL) may be associated with better metabolic outcomes, it may also lead to higher rates of protein malnutrition and vitamin deficiencies ( 12 , 13 ). In humans, a BPL length of 200 cm or 150 cm has been commonly used in OAGB ( 14 , 15 ), while a BPL length of 100 cm has only been proposed recently ( 16 ). A meta-analysis of 19 studies comparing the outcomes of a BPL less than 200 cm and BPL ≥ 200 cm in OAGB showed a higher BMI loss in patients with BPL less than 200 cm, while BPL ≥ 200 cm was associated with a higher incidence in postoperative complications and nutritional deficiencies ( 9 ). A more recent meta-analysis of seven studies comparing OAGB with a 200 cm versus 150 cm BPL revealed favorable outcomes of the 200 cm BPL in terms of weight loss, at an expense of a more severe nutritional deficiency ( 17 ). Regarding RYGB, a meta-analysis of 10 randomized control trials revealed no impact on the BPL length on the weight loss outcomes and the resolution of the metabolic comorbidities ( 18 ). However, the comparison of fixed BPL lengths in humans is challenging due to the inter-individual variations in total bowel length (TBL), which may affect the efficacy and safety of OAGB. For example, the same BPL length may be beneficial for some individuals, whereas it may lead to nutritional risks for others whose TBL is shorter. On the other hand, a shorter BPL may be adequate for patients with a short TBL, but it may be ineffective in individuals with a longer TBL. An experimental OAGB mouse model may overcome these challenges as bowel length does not show high variation in mice of similar age and sex, such that the effects of different BPL lengths on weight and metabolic outcomes can be addressed in a controlled fashion. This study aimed to establish an OAGB model with a short and a long BPL in diet-induced obesity to study the impact of the BPL length on weight loss, glucose tolerance, and obesity-related comorbidities in mice. The search for optimal limb lengths is key to achieve optimal metabolic outcomes, while avoiding complications such as malabsorption or nutrient deficiencies.

Surgical Method

OAGB was performed using either a long or short BPL with the help of a surgical microscope. Control mice received sham surgery followed by caloric restriction to limit their weight gain. Prior to surgery, mice were fasted for 10 h to empty the stomach. On the day of surgery, a single-shot of antibiotics was administered as a prophylaxis [Baytril 10 mg/kg (Bayer)]. Metacam (2.5 mg/kg, Boehringer Ingelheim) was used as an analgesic before and after the surgery. Surgery was performed using inhalation anesthesia (isoflurane, pro-vet). The abdominal cavity was opened through a small midline laparotomy of approximately 1.5 cm in length. A small incision was performed on the antimesenteric side of the jejunum either 5.5 cm distally of the duodenojejunal junction for the short and 9.5 cm for the long BPL group, respectively. For the final analysis, the length of the duodenum of approximately 4 cm was added to the BPL length measurement. The definition of the long BPL was chosen by incrementally extending the length of the short BPL, while at the same time ensuring animal well-being and low complication rates. The stomach was divided at the level of the gastroesophageal junction and the gastric wall defect was oversewn with a single figure of eight stitches (Ethilon 8-0, Ethicon). An esophago-jejunostomy was created by an end-to-side anastomosis of the distal transected jejunum to the distal esophagus (single stitches Ethilon 10-0, Ethicon) (Supplemental Fig. S1). To avoid possible injuries to the bowel, the total bowel length was measured post-mortem.

Sham surgery consisted of midline laparotomy, enterotomy in the middle part of the jejunum, and reclosure of the defect with Ethilon 8-0 single stitches. At the end, the fascia and the skin were individually closed using Vicryl 6-0 (Ethicon) running suture.

DISCUSSION

Our study represents the first study assessing the metabolic effects of OAGB of different BPL lengths in obese mice. To our knowledge, only three studies have previously investigated the metabolic outcomes of OAGB in obese mouse models: in the study of Abu-Gazala et al., five mice treated with HFD for 26 wk underwent OAGB with a BPL corresponding to 30% of the TBL (similar to the long BPL group in our study) ( 32 ). Apart from lower fasting insulin levels, OAGB-operated mice showed lower C-peptide and higher GLP-1 and glucagon compared with the sham-operated/caloric-restricted mice. In the study of Kroh et al., seven OAGB-operated mice with a BPL corresponding to 50% of the TBL demonstrated better glycemic control and lower daily energy intake than the sham-operated mice ( 33 ). In a recently published study, six RYGB-operated mice and six OAGB-operated mice with the same BPL length exhibited similar outcomes regarding weight loss and glucose homeostasis 28 wk after surgery ( 34 ). We found that in diet-induced obesity, an OAGB with a long BPL (29.8% of TBL) did not lead to more pronounced weight loss in mice when compared with an OAGB with a short BPL (22.7% of TBL). However, mice with a long BPL demonstrated notable improvements in glucose tolerance, lower insulin, and reduced cholesterol levels when compared with mice with a short BPL. AUC for insulin ( day 14 ) and glucose ( day 35 ) negatively correlated with BPL length, indicating that a longer BPL in OAGB-operated mice leads to improved metabolic outcomes even in the absence of superior weight loss outcomes. These metabolic changes were accompanied by a trend in reduced gluco- and mineralocorticoids, which are typically elevated in cardio-metabolic diseases ( 35 ). For example, a decrease in aldosterone and a lower ratio of corticosterone/11-dehydrocorticosterone, a marker of higher 11β-HSD2 enzyme activity, indicate both a reduced activation of the mineralocorticoid receptor and hence lower blood pressure. In addition, androgens, which are suppressed by elevated glucocorticoid levels, tended to be increased in the long BPL group. These findings indicate an improved regulation of metabolic processes by steroid hormones.

Previously, we investigated the impact of the BPL length on weight loss and glycemic control in obese mice undergoing RYGB surgery and found that a long BPL led to significantly superior weight loss compared with a short BPL ( 28 ). The weight loss outcomes of the long BPL in RYGB were more profound than those seen in the long BPL OAGB group of the current study. This may be explained by differences in the length of the common limb (CL), where the digestion of nutrients occurs, as RYGB surgery comprises an additional alimentary limb. The mean length of the CL was 70.2% of the TBL in the long and 77.3% in the short BPL arm of the OAGB model, while the CL accounted for 64.9% of the TBL in the long and 68.4% in the short BPL groups of the RYGB model (Supplemental Table S2).

The difference in the BPL length between the long and the short group in the current study was relatively small (29.8 vs. 22.7% of the TBL, respectively). This might explain the absence of significant differences in terms of weight loss between the two groups. For two reasons we did not aim at a greater difference in BPL length. First, based on the low survival rate of a BPL measuring 35% of the TBL in our previous RYGB mouse model ( 28 ), we avoided using longer BPL lengths in the OAGB model. Second, the BPL lengths in OAGB in human studies mostly differ by 50 cm, which accounts for around 8% of the average TBL ( 14 , 36 , 37 ). Therefore, the difference in BPL lengths between the two groups used in our experimental model approximates the difference in limb lengths in human studies. Still, it is intriguing that there was a slight superiority of metabolic outcomes, implying that some metabolic effects of the OAGB might be weight-independent.

Besides the sham surgery, the control group in the current study was calorie restricted postoperatively to achieve similar body weight loss as observed after OAGB surgery. This strategy was chosen to ensure that metabolic differences, particularly glycemic control, could not be attributed to differences in body weights. The limitation of this control group is that food intake is not continuous as mice tend to eat the provided food pellets immediately, resulting in prolonged fasting periods. Hence, our comparison can be considered as OAGB surgery versus caloric restriction by intermittent fasting. Caloric restriction has been shown to be metabolically beneficial in terms of glycemic control and management of MASLD ( 38 – 40 ). This could explain the superior metabolic control in the sham-operated/caloric-restricted mice in terms of glycemia and MASLD observed in our study.

Previous studies in rats fed a chow diet found that a long BPL modulates several antidiabetic mechanisms in a “length-response” relationship. For example, early post-RYGB, a longer BP limb reduced intestinal glucose absorption, while later after RYGB, increased glucose utilization, Roux limb hypertrophy, and increased hormone secretion were found ( 41 ). We found that the length of the BPL negatively correlated with insulin 14 days after the operation ( Fig. 3 B ). After OAGB surgery, insulin levels dropped to sub-normal levels along with improved HOMA-IR ( Fig. 3, A and B ), indicating either reduced insulin secretion by the islets of Langerhans (less beta-cell stress), improved insulin sensitivity, or enhanced insulin clearance. The insulin secretion in sham-operated/caloric-restricted control mice, on the other hand, corresponded approximately to values normally seen in chow fed mice. Interestingly, sub-normal insulin levels were also observed in the long BPL group after RYGB surgery ( 28 ). In accordance with our results, reduced fasting insulin levels were seen after OAGB surgery in mice ( 32 ) and in rats ( 42 ). In humans, OAGB has also been shown to reduce fasting insulin levels and HOMA-IR ( 43 , 44 ). Also, other bariatric procedures such as RYGB or sleeve gastrectomy lead to decreased basal, but enhanced stimulated insulin levels ( 45 , 46 ). Hence, our data support the previous notion that remission of type 2 diabetes after bariatric surgery may be attributed to the correction of hyperinsulinemia ( 47 , 48 ), potentially even in a “length-response” relationship. However, the factor(s) for mitigating hyperinsulinemia after bariatric surgery are currently not understood. Previously, it has been shown that after bariatric surgery, fasting insulin levels are independently reduced relative to fasting glucose, free fatty acids, and insulin sensitivity ( 47 , 48 ). Lactate, on the other hand, correlated with preoperative glucose values and significantly dropped after bariatric surgery, which suggested that diminished availability of lactate as a substrate for hepatic gluconeogenesis could contribute to improved glycemic control postoperatively.

Mechanistically, we analyzed whether the length of the BPL affects the gut microbiota and bile acid composition. The main changes in gut microbiota after OAGB operation involved an increase in Akkermansiaceae , Sutterellaceae , and Enterobacteriaceae , and a decrease in Desulfovibrionaceae and Erysipelotrichaceae , independent of the limb length. Interestingly, although a previous study showed that Bacteroidetes families such as Prevotellaceae or Rickenellaceae were reduced when mice were submitted to a HFD ( 49 ), the level of these families was not restored after surgery, but was in fact further decreased. Also, Firmicutes families, such as Clostridiaceae known to be increased with HFD-induced obesity, were further increased after surgery, although this was not significant in our statistical model. The only families that were increased on a HFD ( 49 ) and decreased after surgery in our model were Desulfovibrionaceae and Erysipelotrichaceae . However, the decrease in Desulfovibrionaceae in OAGB-operated mice might also be due to them not undergoing intermittent fasting, unlike the mice that had sham surgery. Indeed, upon fasting, bacteria are increasingly foraging on host-derived substrates. Increased mucin foraging can result in the proliferation of sulfur-reducing bacteria, such as Desulfovriboinaceae , and as expected, an increase in this family has previously been associated with fasting ( 50 ). A similar association has also been described for Erysipelotrichaceae ( 51 ).

Interestingly, the loss in these bacterial taxa in our study was associated with increased conjugated primary bile acids and at the same time decreased unconjugated primary bile acids as well as unconjugated and conjugated secondary bile acids, suggesting that a “block” in the deconjugation step of the primary bile acids when the above mentioned bacterial taxa are missing. Future studies will need to identify the underlying molecular mechanisms to better understand the disease mechanism and to potentially design targeted therapeutic approaches.

Our study has several limitations. First, due to technical reasons, an esophago-jejunostomy was performed and no gastric pouch was created. However, a gastric pouch in OAGB prevents from the sequelae of the biliary reflux in the distal esophagus and does not influence the metabolic outcomes of the procedure, which were the endpoints of our study. Second, short BPL and long BPL OAGB-operated mice were cohoused to achieve similar housing conditions. As a result, food consumption of the two groups could not be measured. In addition, we opted for intraperitoneal GTTs over oral GTTs for an overall overview about glycemic control, also taking into account welfare considerations (administration of larger volumes orally might have been problematic without a gastric pouch, additionally conducting an OGTT would have required sitagliptin injections and larger blood draws). Therefore, the metabolic effect of release of incretins during GTT was not assessed. Finally, we did not assess for nutritional deficiencies.

Conclusions

Overall, we describe a simple, easy to learn technique to perform OAGB with different limb lengths in mice. In obese mice, OAGB with a long BPL did not achieve superior weight loss compared with OAGB with a short BPL. However, we found weight loss-independent beneficial effects of a long BPL regarding glucose metabolism and cholesterol, potentially mediated through altered bile acids and gut microbiota. Future long-term studies in mice and prospective, randomized human studies comparing short and long BPL in OAGB with a BP length difference of 50 cm, which approximates the percentual length difference between the two groups in our study, are needed to confirm the results. If ultimately translated to humans, these observations imply that short BPL could be used in patients with obesity undergoing OAGB, because of its similar weight loss results and potentially fewer nutritional deficiencies when compared with long BPL. Due to its superior metabolic effect, long limb OAGB may be reserved for patients with obesity-related comorbidities, including type 2 diabetes mellitus and dyslipidemia.
