---
pmid: '32201094'
title: Agaphelin modulates the activation of human bronchial epithelial cells induced
  by lipopolysaccharide and IL-4.
authors:
- Favarin DC
- Pereira ABM
- Francischetti IMB
- da Silva MV
- Rodrigues V Jr
- da Silva PR
- Valenzuela JG
- Teixeira DNS
- Oliveira CJF
- Rogério AP
journal: Immunobiology
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2020.151937
---

# Agaphelin modulates the activation of human bronchial epithelial cells induced by lipopolysaccharide and IL-4.
**Authors:** Favarin DC, Pereira ABM, Francischetti IMB, da Silva MV, Rodrigues V Jr, da Silva PR, Valenzuela JG, Teixeira DNS, Oliveira CJF, Rogério AP
**Journal:** Immunobiology (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.imbio.2020.151937](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imbio.2020.151937)

## Abstract

1. Immunobiology. 2020 May;225(3):151937. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2020.151937. Epub 
2020 Mar 18.

Agaphelin modulates the activation of human bronchial epithelial cells induced 
by lipopolysaccharide and IL-4.

Favarin DC(1), Pereira ABM(2), Francischetti IMB(3), da Silva MV(4), Rodrigues V 
Jr(5), da Silva PR(6), Valenzuela JG(7), Teixeira DNS(8), Oliveira CJF(9), 
Rogério AP(10).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Health Sciences, Department of Clinical Medicine, Laboratory of 
Experimental Immunopharmacology, Federal University of Triângulo Mineiro, 
Uberaba, MG, 38025-350, Brazil. Electronic address: danielyfavarin@hotmail.com.
(2)Institute of Health Sciences, Department of Clinical Medicine, Laboratory of 
Experimental Immunopharmacology, Federal University of Triângulo Mineiro, 
Uberaba, MG, 38025-350, Brazil. Electronic address: alinebmp@gmail.com.
(3)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, USA. 
Electronic address: ivofrancischetti@gmail.com.
(4)Laboratory of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Triângulo Mineiro Federal 
University, Uberaba, Brazil. Electronic address: marcosuftm@gmail.com.
(5)Laboratory of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Triângulo Mineiro Federal 
University, Uberaba, Brazil. Electronic address: 
virmondes.rodrigues@uftm.edu.br.
(6)Institute of Health Sciences, Department of Clinical Medicine, Laboratory of 
Experimental Immunopharmacology, Federal University of Triângulo Mineiro, 
Uberaba, MG, 38025-350, Brazil. Electronic address: 
pauloroberto@cefores.uftm.edu.br.
(7)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, USA. 
Electronic address: jvalenzuela@niaid.nih.gov.
(8)Institute of Health Sciences, Department of Clinical Medicine, Laboratory of 
Experimental Immunopharmacology, Federal University of Triângulo Mineiro, 
Uberaba, MG, 38025-350, Brazil. Electronic address: david.teixeira@uftm.edu.br.
(9)Laboratory of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Triângulo Mineiro Federal 
University, Uberaba, Brazil. Electronic address: carlo.oliveira@uftm.edu.br.
(10)Institute of Health Sciences, Department of Clinical Medicine, Laboratory of 
Experimental Immunopharmacology, Federal University of Triângulo Mineiro, 
Uberaba, MG, 38025-350, Brazil. Electronic address: 
alexandre.rogerio@uftm.edu.br.

Sand fly saliva presents molecules with potential to development of compounds 
for treatment of inflammatory diseases. Agaphelin, isolated from the saliva of 
the mosquito Anopheles gambiae, demonstrates anti-inflammatory properties such 
as neutrophils chemotaxis inhibition. Here, we extend these results and 
evaluated the role of agaphelin (0.1-100 nM) in an in vitro model consisting in 
the activation of human bronchial epithelial cells (BEAS-2B) by IL-4 (50 ng/mL) 
or lipopolysaccharide (LPS; 10 ng/mL). Agaphelin is non-cytotoxic for BEAS-2B 
cells. Notably, agaphelin markedly reduces CCL2 and IL-8 production induced by 
IL-4 or LPS, without altering the IL-10 production. The TLR4 expression and 
STAT1 phosphorylation induced by LPS were inhibited by agaphlin. In addition, 
agaphelin decreased the phosphorylation of STAT6 induce by IL-4, whose effect 
was independent of IL-4-binding activity. Taken together, these findings 
identify agaphelin as a potential anti-inflammatory therapeutic agent for airway 
inflammations.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imbio.2020.151937
PMID: 32201094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest.
