---
pmid: '29727692'
title: C11orf70 Mutations Disrupting the Intraflagellar Transport-Dependent Assembly
  of Multiple Axonemal Dyneins Cause Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.
authors:
- Fassad MR
- Shoemark A
- le Borgne P
- Koll F
- Patel M
- Dixon M
- Hayward J
- Richardson C
- Frost E
- Jenkins L
- Cullup T
- Chung EMK
- Lemullois M
- Aubusson-Fleury A
- Hogg C
- Mitchell DR
- Tassin AM
- Mitchison HM
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2018'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5986720
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.03.024
---

# C11orf70 Mutations Disrupting the Intraflagellar Transport-Dependent Assembly of Multiple Axonemal Dyneins Cause Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.
**Authors:** Fassad MR, Shoemark A, le Borgne P, Koll F, Patel M, Dixon M, Hayward J, Richardson C, Frost E, Jenkins L, Cullup T, Chung EMK, Lemullois M, Aubusson-Fleury A, Hogg C, Mitchell DR, Tassin AM, Mitchison HM
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.03.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.03.024)
**PMC:** [PMC5986720](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5986720/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2018 May 3;102(5):956-972. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.03.024.

C11orf70 Mutations Disrupting the Intraflagellar Transport-Dependent Assembly of 
Multiple Axonemal Dyneins Cause Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.

Fassad MR(1), Shoemark A(2), le Borgne P(3), Koll F(3), Patel M(4), Dixon M(5), 
Hayward J(4), Richardson C(5), Frost E(5), Jenkins L(6), Cullup T(6), Chung 
EMK(7), Lemullois M(3), Aubusson-Fleury A(3), Hogg C(5), Mitchell DR(8), Tassin 
AM(3), Mitchison HM(9).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Genomic Medicine Programme, University College London, UCL Great 
Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London WC1N 1EH, UK; Department of 
Human Genetics, Medical Research Institute, Alexandria University, 165 
El-Horreya Avenue, El-Hadra 21561, Alexandria, Egypt.
(2)PCD Diagnostic Team and Department of Paediatric Respiratory Medicine, Royal 
Brompton and Harefield NHS Trust, London SW3 6NP, UK; School of Medicine, 
University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.
(3)Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Univ. Paris 
Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, 1 Avenue de la Terrasse, 91198 Gif sur Yvette, 
France.
(4)Genetics and Genomic Medicine Programme, University College London, UCL Great 
Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London WC1N 1EH, UK.
(5)PCD Diagnostic Team and Department of Paediatric Respiratory Medicine, Royal 
Brompton and Harefield NHS Trust, London SW3 6NP, UK.
(6)Regional Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children NHS Foundation Trust, Queen Square, London WC1N 3BH, UK.
(7)Population, Policy and Practice Programme, University College London, UCL 
Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London WC1N 1EH, UK.
(8)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, SUNY Upstate Medical 
University, 750 E. Adams St., Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.
(9)Genetics and Genomic Medicine Programme, University College London, UCL Great 
Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London WC1N 1EH, UK. Electronic 
address: h.mitchison@ucl.ac.uk.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a genetically and phenotypically 
heterogeneous disorder characterized by destructive respiratory disease and 
laterality abnormalities due to randomized left-right body asymmetry. PCD is 
mostly caused by mutations affecting the core axoneme structure of motile cilia 
that is essential for movement. Genes that cause PCD when mutated include a 
group that encode proteins essential for the assembly of the ciliary dynein 
motors and the active transport process that delivers them from their 
cytoplasmic assembly site into the axoneme. We screened a cohort of affected 
individuals for disease-causing mutations using a targeted next generation 
sequencing panel and identified two unrelated families (three affected children) 
with mutations in the uncharacterized C11orf70 gene (official gene name 
CFAP300). The affected children share a consistent PCD phenotype from early life 
with laterality defects and immotile respiratory cilia displaying combined loss 
of inner and outer dynein arms (IDA+ODA). Phylogenetic analysis shows C11orf70 
is highly conserved, distributed across species similarly to proteins involved 
in the intraflagellar transport (IFT)-dependant assembly of axonemal dyneins. 
Paramecium C11orf70 RNAi knockdown led to combined loss of ciliary IDA+ODA with 
reduced cilia beating and swim velocity. Tagged C11orf70 in Paramecium and 
Chlamydomonas localizes mainly in the cytoplasm with a small amount in the 
ciliary component. IFT139/TTC21B (IFT-A protein) and FLA10 (IFT kinesin) 
depletion experiments show that its transport within cilia is IFT dependent. 
During ciliogenesis, C11orf70 accumulates at the ciliary tips in a similar 
distribution to the IFT-B protein IFT46. In summary, C11orf70 is essential for 
assembly of dynein arms and C11orf70 mutations cause defective cilia motility 
and PCD.

Copyright © 2018 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.03.024
PMCID: PMC5986720
PMID: 29727692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a genetically and phenotypically heterogeneous disorder characterized by destructive respiratory disease and laterality abnormalities due to randomized left-right body asymmetry. PCD is mostly caused by mutations affecting the core axoneme structure of motile cilia that is essential for movement. Genes that cause PCD when mutated include a group that encode proteins essential for the assembly of the ciliary dynein motors and the active transport process that delivers them from their cytoplasmic assembly site into the axoneme. We screened a cohort of affected individuals for disease-causing mutations using a targeted next generation sequencing panel and identified two unrelated families (three affected children) with mutations in the uncharacterized C11orf70 gene (official gene name CFAP300). The affected children share a consistent PCD phenotype from early life with laterality defects and immotile respiratory cilia displaying combined loss of inner and outer dynein arms (IDA+ODA). Phylogenetic analysis shows C11orf70 is highly conserved, distributed across species similarly to proteins involved in the intraflagellar transport (IFT)-dependant assembly of axonemal dyneins. Paramecium C11orf70 RNAi knockdown led to combined loss of ciliary IDA+ODA with reduced cilia beating and swim velocity. Tagged C11orf70 in Paramecium and Chlamydomonas localizes mainly in the cytoplasm with a small amount in the ciliary component. IFT139/TTC21B (IFT-A protein) and FLA10 (IFT kinesin) depletion experiments show that its transport within cilia is IFT dependent. During ciliogenesis, C11orf70 accumulates at the ciliary tips in a similar distribution to the IFT-B protein IFT46. In summary, C11orf70 is essential for assembly of dynein arms and C11orf70 mutations cause defective cilia motility and PCD.

Introduction

Cilia are complex organelles that form a distinct cellular compartment projecting from the surface of non-dividing cells. They have a microtubular-based axoneme core structure, contained within a specialized membrane that extends from the plasma membrane. This basic structure is highly conserved across species to serve various physiological functions. 1 Motile and non-motile types of cilia in the human body have differences in their axoneme structural arrangement and motilities. 2 , 3 Non-motile primary cilia present on most cells contain nine pairs of microtubules forming a circular scaffold of nine-fold symmetry termed 9+0. Nodal cilia of the embryonic left-right organizer (node) have a similar structure but with dynein “arm” motor subunits attached to the peripheral microtubules that provide motility machinery for ciliary beating. 4 Motile cilia of the respiratory epithelium, fallopian tubes, and brain ependyma (which lines the ventricular system) have a 9+2 arrangement, where the peripheral microtubules attached to dynein arm motors surround a central pair of microtubules. The sperm flagellum has the same structure as motile cilia with subtle differences in the distribution of dynein arms along the axoneme. 5 Lastly, kinocilia of the inner ear hair cells have a 9+2 organization but lack beating motility, containing outer but not inner dynein arms.

The main function of cilia/flagella motility is in generating fluid flow or movement within fluids. Defective cilia motility leads to primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD [MIM: 244400 ]), a genetic disorder in which left-right positioning of body organs is randomized such that laterality problems affect about half of affected individuals. Such laterality defects may in some cases be associated with cardiac, spleen, and other organ problems. 6 Children with PCD suffer from chronic, widespread upper and lower airway infections and congestion, progressing toward bronchiectasis. Symptoms often present early in life with neonatal respiratory distress syndrome. Affected individuals can have hydrocephalus, hearing defects, retinal dystrophy, and infertility in adults especially in males due to sperm dysmotility. 7 , 8

PCD is inherited as an autosomal-recessive or X-linked disease. The genetic cause of PCD, where known, has mainly been mutations affecting one of the hundreds of genes encoding essential components of the complex motile ciliary machinery. PCD is dominated by mutations affecting the axonemal dynein arm motors, for example in subunits of the outer dynein arm (ODA) such as DNAH5 (MIM: 603335 ) 9 or in proteins involved in ODA targeting and anchoring such as CCDC103 (MIM: 614677 ), ARMC4 (MIM: 615408 ), and ODA docking complex (ODA-DC) components such as CCDC151 (MIM: 615956 ). 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16

Perhaps more surprising than the finding that mutations in cilia structural components are a frequent cause of PCD has been a growing number of PCD loci that do not encode parts of the cilium per se but rather encode proteins that act in the apparently complicated process of the assembly and transport of ciliary dynein motors. 17 , 18 Many such assembly factors work strictly in the cytoplasm in a chaperoning step and cause PCD when mutated, such as DNAAF1 (MIM: 613190 ), 19 , 20 , 21 DNAAF2 (MIM: 612517 ), 22 DNAAF3 (MIM: 614566 ), 23 DYX1C1 ( DNAAF4 [MIM: 608706 ]), 24 , 25 HEATR2 ( DNAAF5 [MIM: 61486]), 26 , 27 LRRC6 (MIM: 614930 ), 28 , 29 , 30 and PIH1D3 (MIM: 300933 ). 31 , 32 Other factors, identified in both the human population through analysis of individuals with PCD and in genetic screens for cilia motility defects in model organisms, resemble chaperones in that they affect the assembly of multiple ciliary dynein isoforms but also resemble transport factors based on their presence in a detergent-soluble ciliary compartment. These include ZMYND10 (MIM: 607070 ) 33 , 34 and C21orf59 (MIM: 615494 ). 35 , 36

A number of additional proteins involved in dynein assembly have been identified from non-human studies including ODA8 , ODA5 , and ODA10 of the flagellated model organism Chlamydomonas reinhardtii . ODA5 and ODA10 directly interact as a complex required for formation of an assembly-competent outer dynein arm in the cytoplasm, participating along with ODA8 in the later stages of cytoplasmic ODA assembly. 37 , 38 ODAs are then trafficked into cilia for assembly onto the ODA-DC using the internal cargo transport system, intraflagellar transport (IFT), and subsequent steps involve proteins thought to be involved in an IFT-dependent trafficking step, such as ODA16 ( DAW1 or WDR69 in human), which has so far not been linked to disease in humans. 39 , 40 , 41 The anterograde or base-tip direction of cilia cargo transport involves members of the IFT-B subcomplex, one of which (IFT46) interacts with ODA16. ODA16 therefore seems to function as an adaptor between IFT-B and the ODA, required for the IFT-based transport of ODAs into the cilia/flagella compartment. 40

To reach a genetic diagnosis of PCD, bi-allelic mutations in autosomal-recessive or hemizygous state in an X-linked gene should be identified. Reported mutations in known genes account for only about 70% of PCD cases, so additional genes are still to be identified. 17 Here we describe mutations in a gene, C11orf70 , that cause PCD and demonstrate that C11orf70 encodes a protein needed for assembly of both outer and inner arm axonemal dyneins in respiratory cilia, a hallmark of the axonemal dynein assembly co-chaperones. Using model organisms, we show that C11orf70 orthologs perform a conserved dynein assembly function and are present in both the cytoplasm and in cilia. Furthermore, ciliary abundance of this protein is detergent sensitive and dependent on continued IFT trafficking, as expected for a factor important for late steps in ciliary dynein assembly.

Discussion

Here we report mutations in a previously uncharacterized gene, C11orf70 , in individuals with PCD and situs inversus, demonstrating the potential power of using a targeted NGS approach for discovery of PCD-causing mutations in previously unrecognized disease genes. C11orf70 mutations give rise to immotile respiratory cilia that have a normal 9+2 ultrastructure with a combined lack of both inner and outer dynein arms.

Cilia axonemal structure is highly conserved across species and various model organisms have been used in the past to characterize candidate genes for PCD. Phylogenetic analysis showed that C11orf70 is a highly conserved protein across anciently diverging species, being present today only in organisms with motile cilia/flagella. It is lost in organisms that do not use IFT assembly of their cilia/flagella. It has a specific distribution across different species, following a similar pattern to that of IFT-associated dynein assembly factors like ODA16 ( WDR69 ). 40 , 41 , 68 Together these findings support the importance of C11orf70 in the cytoplasmic assembly, maturation, and IFT-B-based transport into cilia of dynein arm motors that are required for cilia motility in multiciliated cells.

Transcriptional profiling of C11orf70 shows that it is enriched in tissues bearing motile cilia, 73 , 74 although it was not identified in proteomic profiling of human respiratory cilia. 85 Microarray-based gene expression profiling has shown that C11orf70 expression is upregulated during mucociliary differentiation. 86 This is consistent with our finding that the C11orf70 expression profile follows a similar pattern during ciliogenesis to that of other genes that cause PCD when mutated, with a peak around the time of cilia emergence that reaches a plateau afterward. Interestingly, the Chlamydomonas C11orf70 ortholog, FBB5 , has been identified as among the flagellar-basal body group of genes, 77 , 78 upregulated following deflagellation, 79 , 80 but it is not present in any ciliary proteomes. The Paramecium C11orf70 ortholog, GSPATG00011350001 , was also not detected within the cilium proteome 87 or during cilia regrowth after deciliation of Paramecium . 88

To study the role of C11orf70 in cilia motility, we knocked down its ortholog in Paramecium . We first confirmed the efficiency of silencing at the RNA level and then studied the phenotypic consequences of gene silencing on cilia motility and ultrastructure. We found that C11orf70 RNAi knockdown led to a significant reduction in swimming velocity as a secondary effect of a decrease in cilia beating frequency. Analysis of the ciliary ultrastructural phenotype demonstrated the highly conserved, ancient function of C11orf70 in dynein arm assembly since C11orf70 -silenced Paramecium cells mimic the combined outer and inner dynein arm loss of affected individuals with PCD carrying C11orf70 mutations, consistent with their immotile respiratory cilia. This provides evidence that C11orf70 plays a role in the dynein arm assembly/transport process. This work highlights the utility of Paramecium for studies of cilia motility and its emergence as a suitable organism to model the cell biology of disease mechanisms underlying PCD.

In Chlamydomonas we found that the distribution of the C11orf70 ortholog FBB5 between the cytoplasm and cilia/flagella was similar to other IFT-associated dynein assembly proteins such as ODA16 40 and ODA8. 38 A similar distribution was seen for Paramecium C11orf70. Our expression studies in both Chlamydomonas and Paramecium showed that C11orf70 is a soluble, mainly cytoplasmic protein, with a small amount also present in the matrix fraction of cilia/flagella. The protein was around 40× more abundant in the cytoplasm than the cilia/flagella in both organisms. This is similar to ODA16, which is concentrated around the basal bodies with ∼2% found in flagella. 40 , 41 The anterograde IFT partner of ODA16, IFT-B family member IFT46, shows a similar pattern, also concentrated around basal bodies with ∼5% present in flagella. ODA16 and IFT46 are known to interact together to mediate the transport of outer dynein arms into the cilia. 68 Among the other PCD-associated dynein assembly factors, the distribution of C11orf70 is reminiscent of two, ZMYND10 and C21orf59, that are considered predominantly cytoplasmic with a small component potentially also detectable within cilia. 33 , 35

The flagellar localization of Chlamydomonas FBB5-HA was unaffected by most mutations that disrupt ODA assembly but was reduced by loss of the IFT46-associated transport factor ODA16, although we found that its abundance in the axoneme was not dependent on the N terminus of IFT46 (we note that this effect could result from a general reduced abundance of IFT in oda16 flagella rather than being a direct consequence of ODA16 mutation). Flagellar localization was dependent on IFT, and FBB5::HA abundance increased during flagellar growth, a time when high levels of precursor transport are needed. 89 Paramecium work supported these findings, since after deciliation followed by cilia regrowth C11orf70 accumulates in the cilia tips in Paramecium in the same way as IFT46. IFT46 is an IFT-B family component that governs anterograde (cilia base to tip) transport in the cilium and is very active during ciliation. IFT46 is released at the tip of the cilium where it accumulates during active IFT and C11orf70 may behave similarly. We further found in Paramecium that depletion of an IFT-A retrograde (cilia tip to base) transport component, IFT139/TTC21B, affected the ciliary localization of C11orf70, causing it to accumulate abnormally at the ciliary tips. This is to be expected if the protein, like IFT components, is recycled out of cilia by the IFT-A transport system.

Overall, our data implicate C11orf70 as playing a role within the chaperone-mediated sequential protein folding and trafficking pathways that are required for the cytoplasmic preassembly of dynein arm motors and their subsequent import into the motile ciliary axoneme. 18 , 23 , 31 , 82 , 90 As is the case for other putative dynein assembly factors acting to correctly assemble the dynein motor complexes responsible for cilia motility, it is not yet clear how a protein can act as an adaptor for both ODA and IDA cilia assembly and whether it would need to recognize a component of both inner and outer dynein arms. Since we find that C11orf70 is transported into cilia, interacts with IFT-A, and behaves similarly to an IFT component, we propose that it could provide chaperone-related functions within the cytoplasm, continuing until the dynein arm complex is anchored in cilia, then being recycled back to the cytoplasm via retrograde IFT (IFT-A).

Together, these data identify mutations in C11orf70 as a cause of PCD with combined outer and inner dynein loss, cilia immotility, and situs inversus. This has important clinical implications for improved understanding of the genetic basis of the disease and counselling of affected families. The combined evidence from human and distantly related unicellular organisms support a role for C11rof70 as an additional dynein assembly/transport factor, its abundance in the cilium dependent upon IFT.
