---
pmid: '17290233'
title: Cell death of melanophores in zebrafish trpm7 mutant embryos depends on melanin
  synthesis.
authors:
- McNeill MS
- Paulsen J
- Bonde G
- Burnight E
- Hsu MY
- Cornell RA
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.jid.5700710
---

# Cell death of melanophores in zebrafish trpm7 mutant embryos depends on melanin synthesis.
**Authors:** McNeill MS, Paulsen J, Bonde G, Burnight E, Hsu MY, Cornell RA
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.jid.5700710](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jid.5700710)

## Abstract

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2007 Aug;127(8):2020-30. doi: 10.1038/sj.jid.5700710. Epub 
2007 Feb 8.

Cell death of melanophores in zebrafish trpm7 mutant embryos depends on melanin 
synthesis.

McNeill MS(1), Paulsen J, Bonde G, Burnight E, Hsu MY, Cornell RA.

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Neuroscience, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, Iowa, USA.

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2007 Aug;127(8):1855-6. doi: 10.1038/sj.jid.5700773.

Transient receptor potential melastatin 7 (TRPM7) is a broadly expressed, 
non-selective cation channel. Studies in cultured cells implicate TRPM7 in 
regulation of cell growth, spreading, and survival. However, zebrafish trpm7 
homozygous mutants display death of melanophores and temporary paralysis, but no 
gross morphological defects during embryonic stages. This phenotype implies that 
melanophores are unusually sensitive to decreases in Trpm7 levels, a hypothesis 
we investigate here. We find that pharmacological inhibition of caspases does 
not rescue melanophore viability in trpm7 mutants, implying that melanophores 
die by a mechanism other than apoptosis. Consistent with this possibility, 
ultrastructural analysis of dying melanophores in trpm7 mutants reveals abnormal 
melanosomes and evidence of a ruptured plasma membrane, indicating that cell 
death occurs by necrosis. Interestingly, inhibition of melanin synthesis largely 
prevents melanophore cell death in trpm7 mutants. These results suggest that 
melanophores require Trpm7 in order to detoxify intermediates of melanin 
synthesis. We find that unlike TRPM1, TRPM7 is expressed in human melanoma cell 
lines, indicating that these cells may also be sensitized to reduction of TRPM7 
levels.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.jid.5700710
PMID: 17290233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
