---
pmid: '19369211'
title: PALB2 is an integral component of the BRCA complex required for homologous
  recombination repair.
authors:
- Sy SM
- Huen MS
- Chen J
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC2678481
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0811159106
---

# PALB2 is an integral component of the BRCA complex required for homologous recombination repair.
**Authors:** Sy SM, Huen MS, Chen J
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0811159106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0811159106)
**PMC:** [PMC2678481](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2678481/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Apr 28;106(17):7155-60. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0811159106. Epub 2009 Apr 15.

PALB2 is an integral component of the BRCA complex required for homologous 
recombination repair.

Sy SM(1), Huen MS, Chen J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Mutations in breast cancer susceptibility gene 1 and 2 (BRCA1 and BRCA2) 
predispose individuals to breast and ovarian cancer development. We previously 
reported an in vivo interaction between BRCA1 and BRCA2. However, the biological 
significance of their association is thus far undefined. Here, we report that 
PALB2, the partner and localizer of BRCA2, binds directly to BRCA1, and serves 
as the molecular scaffold in the formation of the BRCA1-PALB2-BRCA2 complex. The 
association between BRCA1 and PALB2 is primarily mediated via apolar bonding 
between their respective coiled-coil domains. More importantly, BRCA1 mutations 
identified in cancer patients disrupted the specific interaction between BRCA1 
and PALB2. Consistent with the converging functions of the BRCA proteins in DNA 
repair, cells harboring mutations with abrogated BRCA1-PALB2 interaction 
resulted in defective homologous recombination (HR) repair. We propose that, via 
its direct interaction with PALB2, BRCA1 fine-tunes recombinational repair 
partly through its modulatory role in the PALB2-dependent loading of BRCA2-RAD51 
repair machinery at DNA breaks. Our findings uncover PALB2 as the molecular 
adaptor between the BRCA proteins, and suggest that impaired HR repair is one of 
the fundamental causes for genomic instability and tumorigenesis observed in 
patients carrying BRCA1, BRCA2, or PALB2 mutations.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0811159106
PMCID: PMC2678481
PMID: 19369211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Mutations in breast cancer susceptibility gene 1 and 2 ( BRCA1 and BRCA2 ) predispose individuals to breast and ovarian cancer development. We previously reported an in vivo interaction between BRCA1 and BRCA2. However, the biological significance of their association is thus far undefined. Here, we report that PALB2, the partner and localizer of BRCA2, binds directly to BRCA1, and serves as the molecular scaffold in the formation of the BRCA1-PALB2-BRCA2 complex. The association between BRCA1 and PALB2 is primarily mediated via apolar bonding between their respective coiled-coil domains. More importantly, BRCA1 mutations identified in cancer patients disrupted the specific interaction between BRCA1 and PALB2. Consistent with the converging functions of the BRCA proteins in DNA repair, cells harboring mutations with abrogated BRCA1-PALB2 interaction resulted in defective homologous recombination (HR) repair. We propose that, via its direct interaction with PALB2, BRCA1 fine-tunes recombinational repair partly through its modulatory role in the PALB2-dependent loading of BRCA2-RAD51 repair machinery at DNA breaks. Our findings uncover PALB2 as the molecular adaptor between the BRCA proteins, and suggest that impaired HR repair is one of the fundamental causes for genomic instability and tumorigenesis observed in patients carrying BRCA1 , BRCA2 , or PALB2 mutations.

Discussion

In this study, we have uncovered PALB2 as an integral component of the BRCA complex in vivo. Importantly, we found that PALB2 directly associates with BRCA1. We also provided biochemical evidences to demonstrate the existence of the trimeric BRCA complex containing BRCA1, PALB2, and BRCA2. We demonstrated that the specific interaction between BRCA1 and PALB2 is mediated by the coiled-coil motifs where mutations on the coiled-coil domains, including cancer patient derived BRCA1 mutations, would disrupt their complex formation. Functional analyses suggested that HR repair would be compromised when the PALB2-BRCA1 interaction is disrupted. These findings extend our earlier study ( 5 ), underscore the importance of the BRCA1-PALB2-BRCA2 complex in HR repair, and support the idea that distinct BRCA1 macromolecular complexes participate in various aspect in the DNA damage response.

BRCA1 has multiple roles in the cellular response to DNA damage ( 3 , 6 – 10 ). Besides its functions in DNA damage checkpoint control, BRCA1 can also promotes cell survival via DNA repair ( 23 , 24 ). Our findings that abrogation of the BRCA1-PALB2 interaction resulted in HR repair defects and compromised cell survival on DNA damage suggest that BRCA1 contributes to HR repair, at least in part, via the PALB2-BRCA2-RAD51 axis. That BRCA1, and its interaction with PALB2, is required for optimal formation of RAD51-ssDNA nucleoprotein filament ( Fig. S7 a and b ) is entirely consistent with this hypothesis. Given that BRCA1 also interacts with CtIP and BACH1, both of which have documented nonoverlapping roles at various steps of HR repair ( 25 – 29 ), it will be interesting to examine how each of these BRCA1 macrocomplexes work in concert in the maintenance of genome stability.

Domain mapping studies revealed that the BRCA1-PALB2 interaction is mediated via their respective coiled-coil motifs, and is independent from the BRCA1 BRCT domain ( Fig. 2 ; Fig. S3 ). This observation is striking, considering that distinct BRCA1 macrocomplexes, including those that contains CtIP, BACH1, and the CCDC98/RAP80 complex, respectively, are selectively formed via the BRCA1 BRCT domain. This result suggests that PALB2 might be present among the various BRCA1 macrocomplexes. Indeed, both CtIP and BACH1 were found in PALB2 precipitates ( Fig. 1 D ). Thus, the existence of BRCA1-PALB2 complex that contains CtIP or BACH1 highlights the possibility that BRCA1 may coordinate and fine-tune DNA repair via its ability to monitor processes including DNA resection and RAD51 loading simultaneously. Indeed, besides its interaction with PALB2, a requirement of the BRCA1 BRCT domain for efficient RAD51 foci formation ( Fig. S5 and Fig. S6 a ), and optimal HR repair ( Fig. 4 B ; Fig. S6 b and c ), was also observed, and parallels the repair deficits in CtIP and BACH1-depleted cells ( Fig. S7 ). Also, codepletion of PALB2 and CtIP or BACH1 demonstrated further reductions in gene conversion rates, as compared with PALB2-depleted cells ( Fig. S7 e ). All these results, together, imply that BRCA1 may have accessory functions at multiple steps during HR repair via its associations with several of these proteins directly involved in HR processes.

Notably, disruption of the BRCA1-PALB2 interaction, although resulted in profound effects in HR repair and MMC hypersensitivity, did not noticeably affect the intra-S-phase checkpoint ( Fig. S8 a and b ), revealing the function specificity for the complex formation. We now know that through its phosphorylation-dependent interaction with the CCDC98/RAP80 complex, the BRCA1 BRCT domain is required for its damage-induced focal accumulation at sites of DNA damage ( 30 – 34 ). Intriguingly, our data demonstrated that BRCA1 only has an accessory role in the focal concentration of PALB2 and RAD51 at DSBs ( Fig. 3 ; Fig. S4 , Fig. S5 , Fig. S6 a , and Fig. S8 c ). This observation suggests that other factors or activities might be more important for the sustained localization of PALB2 at DNA lesions. We speculate that, although BRCA1 is not essential for sustained localization of PALB2 at DNA breaks, BRCA1 may stabilize PALB2 at the sites of DNA damage by serving as an additional anchor point for PALB2 at DSBs ( Fig. 4 D ).

Mutations in BRCA1 predispose individuals to early development of breast and ovarian cancers. Given the prominent role of BRCA1 in protecting genome integrity, one would speculate that clinical mutations found among BRCA1 patients might provide mechanistic insights into its tumor suppressing function in vivo. Accordingly, our study exploited the patient derived BRCA1 missense mutations residing within its PALB2-interacting coiled-coil motif. The altered BRCA1-PALB2 interaction ( Fig. 2 ; Fig. S2 and Fig. S3 ) and, thus, the BRCA1-PALB2-BRCA2 complex formation, together with DNA repair deficits observed with these patient-derived BRCA1 mutations, strongly suggest that in vivo assembly of the BRCA complex through PALB2 likely constitutes an important event required for their tumor suppressor functions. These results may also explain the similar phenotype observed in patients harboring mutations in each of these 3 proteins. Together with the observation that the BRCA1 BRCT mutant M1775R also displays significant DNA repair deficits ( Fig. 4 B ; Fig. S6 b and c ), our data support the idea that various BRCA1 functions converge and contribute to its role in HR repair and its tumor suppressor activity.
