---
pmid: '24319056'
title: Global analysis of cdc14 dephosphorylation sites reveals essential regulatory
  role in mitosis and cytokinesis.
authors:
- Kao L
- Wang YT
- Chen YC
- Tseng SF
- Jhang JC
- Chen YJ
- Teng SC
journal: Mol Cell Proteomics
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC3916656
doi: 10.1074/mcp.M113.032680
---

# Global analysis of cdc14 dephosphorylation sites reveals essential regulatory role in mitosis and cytokinesis.
**Authors:** Kao L, Wang YT, Chen YC, Tseng SF, Jhang JC, Chen YJ, Teng SC
**Journal:** Mol Cell Proteomics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1074/mcp.M113.032680](https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M113.032680)
**PMC:** [PMC3916656](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3916656/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014 Feb;13(2):594-605. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M113.032680.
Epub  2013 Dec 7.

Global analysis of cdc14 dephosphorylation sites reveals essential regulatory 
role in mitosis and cytokinesis.

Kao L(1), Wang YT, Chen YC, Tseng SF, Jhang JC, Chen YJ, Teng SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei 10051, Taiwan;

Degradation of the M phase cyclins triggers the exit from M phase. Cdc14 is the 
major phosphatase required for the exit from the M phase. One of the functions 
of Cdc14 is to dephosphorylate and activate the Cdh1/APC/C complex, resulting in 
the degradation of the M phase cyclins. However, other crucial targets of Cdc14 
for mitosis and cytokinesis remain to be elucidated. Here we systematically 
analyzed the positions of dephosphorylation sites for Cdc14 in the budding yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Quantitative mass spectrometry identified a total of 
835 dephosphorylation sites on 455 potential Cdc14 substrates in vivo. We 
validated two events, and through functional studies we discovered that 
Cdc14-mediated dephosphorylation of Smc4 and Bud3 is essential for proper 
mitosis and cytokinesis, respectively. These results provide insight into the 
Cdc14-mediated pathways for exiting the M phase.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M113.032680
PMCID: PMC3916656
PMID: 24319056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Degradation of the M phase cyclins triggers the exit from M phase. Cdc14 is the major phosphatase required for the exit from the M phase. One of the functions of Cdc14 is to dephosphorylate and activate the Cdh1/APC/C complex, resulting in the degradation of the M phase cyclins. However, other crucial targets of Cdc14 for mitosis and cytokinesis remain to be elucidated. Here we systematically analyzed the positions of dephosphorylation sites for Cdc14 in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Quantitative mass spectrometry identified a total of 835 dephosphorylation sites on 455 potential Cdc14 substrates in vivo . We validated two events, and through functional studies we discovered that Cdc14-mediated dephosphorylation of Smc4 and Bud3 is essential for proper mitosis and cytokinesis, respectively. These results provide insight into the Cdc14-mediated pathways for exiting the M phase.

DISCUSSION

Within a cell cycle, multiple events need to be well coordinated. At the M phase, chromosome condensation, mitosis, and cytokinesis occur sequentially to guarantee precise entry and exit of the M phase. A few master regulators may control numerous signals, and Cdc14 seems to play such a role. Pinpointing the dephosphorylated residues for Cdc14 is essential for understanding its functions and detailed mechanisms. The identification of dephosphorylation sites provides the ultimate proof that the putative substrate is indeed dephosphorylated. In this study, we identified 455 potential Cdc14 substrates, and the majority of them are critical for M phase progression, confirming the master role of Cdc14 at M phase. Additionally, Cdc14 displays connections with many MAPK pathways. Cdc14 interacts with the pheromone and filamentous growth pathway MAPK Ste7 and the PKC pathway MAPKKK Bck1, and increases in the phosphorylation of Ste7 and Bck1 were observed in cdc14-1 cells ( 44 ). These results indicate that Ste7 and Bck1 may be direct targets of Cdc14 and that Cdc14 may serve as a hub for multiple environmental response signals.

To validate this broad screen, we demonstrated that two candidates, Smc4 and Bud3, are indeed Cdc14 direct substrates. Smc4 is the major component of condensin and is required for chromosome condensation. Our study demonstrated that the phosphorylation status of Smc4 S128 is critical for condensin function ( Fig. 7 ). This phosphorylation does not control the interaction between Smc4 and the non-Smc subunit, but it regulates the loading ability of condensin to chromatin. Bud3 is important for the budding site selection at the early M phase. Not only is Bud3 required for budding site selection, but it also recruits Clb2 to the bud neck for Cdk1-mediated Swe1 degradation and cytokinesis. Elimination of Cdk1/Cdc14-controlled regulation of Bud3 impedes Clb2 recruitment and Swe1 degradation ( Fig. 7 ). The C terminus of Bud3 was previously shown to be critical for cytokinesis ( 41 ). In agreement with this, exit from M phase was delayed in bud3 S1549T1566A cells ( supplemental Figs. S5 A and S5 B ). The regulation of both Smc4 and Bud3 is mediated by Cdk1 and Cdc14. Abolishing either modification deregulated normal M phase progression ( Fig. 4 A and supplemental Fig. S5 ). These results indicate that a single Cdc14-mediated regulation is critical for precise cell cycle movement.

Cdc14 is thought to dephosphorylate many substrates, and indeed many potential substrates were identified in our study ( supplemental Table S5 ). Cdh1 is the best-known substrate of Cdc14 and is activated through Cdc14-dependent dephosphorylation ( 23 , 60 ). In our screen, we did not identify Cdh1. The exact Cdc14 dephosphorylation site on Cdh1 has not been mapped yet. Our approach was based on mass spectrometry analysis of trypsin-digested fragments. It is possible that the Cdc14 dephosphorylated site is located on a trypsin-digested fragment of Cdh1 greater than 35 amino acids, which is beyond the detection ability of the mass instrument ( 61 , 62 ).

Our study globally identified Cdc14 substrates. Among all these potential substrates, many are well conserved in higher organisms. For example, minichromosome maintenance 2–7 proteins play a pivotal helicase role in DNA replication in eukaryotic organisms. Upon entry into S-phase, several subunits of the MCM hexameric complex are phosphorylated by CDK ( 63 , 64 ). The MCM complex is highly conserved from yeast to human, and our study also identified Mcm2, Mcm3, and Mcm7 as potential Cdc14 substrates. Moreover, fine control of individual Cdc14-mediated regulation may be important in order for yeast to adapt to environmental challenges during the cell cycle in the wild and further help them to evolve. Future investigation will be required in order to understand this process.
