---
pmid: '1848670'
title: Two novel protein-tyrosine kinases, each with a second phosphotransferase-related
  catalytic domain, define a new class of protein kinase.
authors:
- Wilks AF
- Harpur AG
- Kurban RR
- Ralph SJ
- Zürcher G
- Ziemiecki A
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1991'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC359893
doi: 10.1128/mcb.11.4.2057-2065.1991
---

# Two novel protein-tyrosine kinases, each with a second phosphotransferase-related catalytic domain, define a new class of protein kinase.
**Authors:** Wilks AF, Harpur AG, Kurban RR, Ralph SJ, Zürcher G, Ziemiecki A
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1128/mcb.11.4.2057-2065.1991](https://doi.org/10.1128/mcb.11.4.2057-2065.1991)
**PMC:** [PMC359893](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC359893/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Apr;11(4):2057-65. doi: 10.1128/mcb.11.4.2057-2065.1991.

Two novel protein-tyrosine kinases, each with a second 
phosphotransferase-related catalytic domain, define a new class of protein 
kinase.

Wilks AF(1), Harpur AG, Kurban RR, Ralph SJ, Zürcher G, Ziemiecki A.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Victoria, 
Australia.

The protein-tyrosine kinases (PTKs) are a burgeoning family of proteins, each of 
which bears a conserved domain of 250 to 300 amino acids capable of 
phosphorylating substrate proteins on tyrosine residues. We recently exploited 
the existence of two highly conserved sequence elements within the catalytic 
domain to generate PTK-specific degenerate oligonucleotide primers (A. F. Wilks, 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86:1603-1607, 1989). By application of the polymerase 
chain reaction, portions of the catalytic domains of several novel PTKs were 
amplified. We describe here the primary sequence of one of these new PTKs, JAK1 
(from Janus kinase), a member of a new class of PTK characterized by the 
presence of a second phosphotransferase-related domain immediately N terminal to 
the PTK domain. The second phosphotransferase domain bears all the hallmarks of 
a protein kinase, although its structure differs significantly from that of the 
PTK and threonine/serine kinase family members. A second member of this family 
(JAK2) has been partially characterized and exhibits a similar array of 
kinase-related domains. JAK1 is a large, widely expressed membrane-associated 
phosphoprotein of approximately 130,000 Da. The PTK activity of JAK1 has been 
located in the C-terminal PTK-like domain. The role of the second kinaselike 
domain is unknown.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.11.4.2057-2065.1991
PMCID: PMC359893
PMID: 1848670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The protein-tyrosine kinases (PTKs) are a burgeoning family of proteins, each of which bears a conserved domain of 250 to 300 amino acids capable of phosphorylating substrate proteins on tyrosine residues. We recently exploited the existence of two highly conserved sequence elements within the catalytic domain to generate PTK-specific degenerate oligonucleotide primers (A. F. Wilks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86:1603-1607, 1989). By application of the polymerase chain reaction, portions of the catalytic domains of several novel PTKs were amplified. We describe here the primary sequence of one of these new PTKs, JAK1 (from Janus kinase), a member of a new class of PTK characterized by the presence of a second phosphotransferase-related domain immediately N terminal to the PTK domain. The second phosphotransferase domain bears all the hallmarks of a protein kinase, although its structure differs significantly from that of the PTK and threonine/serine kinase family members. A second member of this family (JAK2) has been partially characterized and exhibits a similar array of kinase-related domains. JAK1 is a large, widely expressed membrane-associated phosphoprotein of approximately 130,000 Da. The PTK activity of JAK1 has been located in the C-terminal PTK-like domain. The role of the second kinaselike domain is unknown.
