---
pmid: '14622577'
title: Role of beta-catenin in synaptic vesicle localization and presynaptic assembly.
authors:
- Bamji SX
- Shimazu K
- Kimes N
- Huelsken J
- Birchmeier W
- Lu B
- Reichardt LF
journal: Neuron
year: '2003'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC2757419
doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00718-9
---

# Role of beta-catenin in synaptic vesicle localization and presynaptic assembly.
**Authors:** Bamji SX, Shimazu K, Kimes N, Huelsken J, Birchmeier W, Lu B, Reichardt LF
**Journal:** Neuron (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00718-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00718-9)
**PMC:** [PMC2757419](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2757419/)

## Abstract

1. Neuron. 2003 Nov 13;40(4):719-31. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00718-9.

Role of beta-catenin in synaptic vesicle localization and presynaptic assembly.

Bamji SX(1), Shimazu K, Kimes N, Huelsken J, Birchmeier W, Lu B, Reichardt LF.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Physiology, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Cadherins and catenins are thought to promote adhesion between pre and 
postsynaptic elements in the brain. Here we show a role for beta-catenin in 
localizing the reserved pool of vesicles at presynaptic sites. Deletion of 
beta-catenin in hippocampal pyramidal neurons in vivo resulted in a reduction in 
the number of reserved pool vesicles per synapse and an impaired response to 
prolonged repetitive stimulation. This corresponded to a dispersion of vesicles 
along the axon in cultured neurons. Interestingly, these effects are not due to 
beta-catenin's involvement in cadherin-mediated adhesion or wnt signaling. 
Instead, beta-catenin modulates vesicle localization via its PDZ binding domain 
to recruit PDZ proteins such as Veli to cadherin at synapses. This study defines 
a specific role for cadherins and catenins in synapse organization beyond their 
roles in mediating cell adhesion.

DOI: 10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00718-9
PMCID: PMC2757419
PMID: 14622577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

Synapse formation is a well-concerted process that involves multiple stages. The initial synaptic contact is followed by a series of events including cell-cell adhesion and the appearance of specializations at regions of contact. Despite extensive studies of the adhesive interactions between pre- and postsynaptic membranes ( Mizoguchi et al., 2002 ; Phillips et al., 2001 ; Polo-Parada et al., 2001 ), the mechanisms by which such interactions lead to the recruitment of synaptic proteins to pre- and postsynaptic terminals are not known. Moreover, while the timing of synaptogenic events has been described ( Friedman et al., 2000 ), our understanding of the cellular mechanisms that orchestrate synapse assembly in the central nervous system (CNS) is limited.

Cadherins, a family of cell adhesion proteins found at adherens junctions, have been implicated in synapse formation ( Ranscht, 2000 ; Serafini, 1997 , 1999 ; Togashi et al., 2002 ). Classic cadherins mediate strong adhesion through interaction with β-catenin, which in turn associates with α-catenin and the actin cytoskeleton ( Daniels et al., 2001 ; Ivanov et al., 2001 ). Recent literature has shown that cadherin-mediated cell junctions are signaling centers, not simply points of adhesion. For example, cadherins recruit and bind to several members of a second catenin family, the p120 catenins (p120ctn), which themselves link cadherin to a number of signaling pathways ( Daniel and Reynolds, 1995 ; Reynolds et al., 1994 ; Shibamoto et al., 1995 ; Staddon et al., 1995 ). Members of the p120ctn family have been shown to activate Rac and inhibit Rho activity ( Goodwin et al., 2003 ; Magie et al., 2002 ), to recruit the cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases Fer and Fyn ( Piedra et al., 2003 ), and to contain PDZ binding motifs that recruit a variety of cytoplasmic PDZ motif-containing proteins ( Izawa et al., 2002 ; Laura et al., 2002 ). Cadherins also recruit tyrosine kinases and phosphatases ( Steinberg and McNutt, 1999 ), Arp2/3 complexes ( Kovacs et al., 2002 ), PI-3 kinase ( Pece et al., 1999 ), heterotrimeric GTPases ( Meigs et al., 2001 ), and adaptor proteins ( Xu et al., 1997 ; Yap and Kovacs, 2003 ). Similarly, in addition to its role linking cadherins to the cytoskeleton, β-catenin interacts with many signaling partners, including PI-3 kinase ( Woodfield et al., 2001 ), IQGAP ( Kuroda et al., 1996 ), APC, and several transcription factors ( Barth et al., 1997 ). β-catenin also has a PDZ binding site at its carboxy terminus that has been shown to bind to Lin-7, the C. elegans homolog of Veli ( Perego et al., 2000 ), and the membrane-associated guanylate kinase protein MAGI-1 or S-SCAM ( Dobrosotskaya and James, 2000 ; Kawajiri et al., 2000 ; Nishimura et al., 2002 ), thereby linking cadherins to PDZ proteins as well as to the actin cytoskeleton. Thus, both cadherin and β-catenin interact with a variety of signaling proteins and may mediate multiple functions at synaptic junctions.

Cadherins and their associated catenins are expressed in the developing and adult CNS ( Chauvet et al., 2003 ; Fannon and Colman, 1996 ; Montonen et al., 2001 ; Uchida et al., 1996 ) and are colocalized at both pre- and postsynaptic compartments prior to the assembly of a functional synapse. Indeed, N-cadherin and other components of the early active zone, including piccolo, bassoon, syntaxin, SNAP-25, and chromogranin B, are transported together in an active zone precursor vesicle and initiate synapse formation by establishing a potential active zone ( Zhai et al., 2001 ). Subsequently, synaptic vesicle proteins such as synapsin are recruited presynaptically ( Benson and Tanaka, 1998 ; Zhai et al., 2001 ), while SAP-90/PSD-95 and glutamate receptors are recruited postsynaptically ( Coussen et al., 2002 ; Friedman et al., 2000 ).

The early pre- and postsynaptic localization of cadherin/catenin complexes suggests a role in synapse assembly. This is supported by a number of findings. First, anti-cadherin antibodies destabilize contacts between growth cones and their targets ( Sanes and Yamagata, 1999 ) and disrupt subcellular localization of postsynaptic density elements ( Honjo et al., 2000 ). Second, inhibition of cadherin-based adhesion between hippocampal neurons perturbs synapse formation and function ( Togashi et al., 2002 ). Third, genetic analyses have shown that cadherins regulate synaptic vesicle accumulation in Drosophila ( Iwai et al., 2002 ). In addition, β-catenin has been shown to promote synapse formation via its participation in the wnt signaling pathway ( Hall et al., 2000 ).

The continued expression of cadherins and catenins at the synapse suggests a further role for these molecules in synapse plasticity. Indeed, synaptic activity can modulate the distribution of N-cadherin ( Bozdagi et al., 2000 ; Shan et al., 2002 ) and β-catenin ( Murase et al., 2002 ) and perturbations of classical cadherin function have been shown to affect hippocampal LTP ( Manabe et al., 2000 ; Tanaka et al., 2000 ; Tang et al., 1998 ).

In the present study, we perturbed β-catenin function both in vivo and in vitro and examined the effects on synaptic development. Our results indicate that β-catenin plays a role in localizing synaptic vesicles at the presynaptic active zone by acting as a scaffolding protein to link cadherin clusters to PDZ domain-containing proteins via its PDZ binding motif. These results provide new insights into the molecular mechanisms by which the cadherin-catenin complex controls synapse formation.

Discussion

While substantial evidence suggests that cell adhesion molecules are involved in synapse development and plasticity ( Ranscht, 2000 ), their mechanisms of action at the synapse remain largely unknown. In this study, we have focused on the role of cadherins and catenins in synapse assembly. Previous work had implicated a role for cadherins in synapse development ( Togashi et al., 2002 ); however, cadherins have been shown to associate with several different catenins, including β-catenin and members of the p120ctn family, and to activate several different signaling pathways. Thus the mechanism(s) through which cadherin binding regulates synapse formation has been unclear. We now show a role for β-catenin in presynaptic assembly independent of its role as a linker to the F-actin cytoskeleton.

We have perturbed β-catenin function in vivo and in vitro to modulate the function of all classic cadherins expressed in hippocampal neurons. We found that β-catenin is important for appropriate localization of the reserved pool of synaptic vesicles, which is necessary during sustained repetitive synaptic transmission. Further, we demonstrate that the PDZ binding domain of β-catenin plays a critical role in the mobilization and clustering of vesicles in presynaptic terminals. Finally, we show that although the PDZ binding domain of β-catenin is important for the localization of Veli and CASK, which are most likely associated with either Mint1 or Caskin1, to synapses, these complexes may not play a major role in vesicle localization. To our knowledge, this study reveals for the first time an important presynaptic function of β-catenin in controlling the size of the reserved vesicle pool in nerve terminals. By revealing the critical role of the PDZ binding domain of β-catenin, our findings provide insight into how the cadherin-catenin system functions during synaptogenesis.
