---
pmid: '25544563'
title: Global mapping of herpesvirus-host protein complexes reveals a transcription
  strategy for late genes.
authors:
- Davis ZH
- Verschueren E
- Jang GM
- Kleffman K
- Johnson JR
- Park J
- Von Dollen J
- Maher MC
- Johnson T
- Newton W
- Jäger S
- Shales M
- Horner J
- Hernandez RD
- Krogan NJ
- Glaunsinger BA
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC4305015
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.11.026
---

# Global mapping of herpesvirus-host protein complexes reveals a transcription strategy for late genes.
**Authors:** Davis ZH, Verschueren E, Jang GM, Kleffman K, Johnson JR, Park J, Von Dollen J, Maher MC, Johnson T, Newton W, Jäger S, Shales M, Horner J, Hernandez RD, Krogan NJ, Glaunsinger BA
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2014.11.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2014.11.026)
**PMC:** [PMC4305015](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4305015/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2015 Jan 22;57(2):349-60. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.11.026. Epub
2014  Dec 24.

Global mapping of herpesvirus-host protein complexes reveals a transcription 
strategy for late genes.

Davis ZH(1), Verschueren E(2), Jang GM(2), Kleffman K(3), Johnson JR(2), Park 
J(3), Von Dollen J(2), Maher MC(4), Johnson T(2), Newton W(2), Jäger S(2), 
Shales M(2), Horner J(5), Hernandez RD(6), Krogan NJ(7), Glaunsinger BA(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant & Microbial Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA; Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunity, School of 
Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(2)Department of Cellular & Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA; Gladstone Institutes, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(3)Department of Plant & Microbial Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(4)Institute for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 94158, USA; Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(5)Thermo Fisher Scientific, 355 River Oaks Parkway, San Jose, CA 95134, USA.
(6)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(7)Department of Cellular & Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA; Gladstone Institutes, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. Electronic address: 
nevan.krogan@ucsf.edu.
(8)Department of Plant & Microbial Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. Electronic address: glaunsinger@berkeley.edu.

Mapping host-pathogen interactions has proven instrumental for understanding how 
viruses manipulate host machinery and how numerous cellular processes are 
regulated. DNA viruses such as herpesviruses have relatively large coding 
capacity and thus can target an extensive network of cellular proteins. To 
identify the host proteins hijacked by this pathogen, we systematically affinity 
tagged and purified all 89 proteins of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus 
(KSHV) from human cells. Mass spectrometry of this material identified over 500 
virus-host interactions. KSHV causes AIDS-associated cancers, and its 
interaction network is enriched for proteins linked to cancer and overlaps with 
proteins that are also targeted by HIV-1. We found that the conserved KSHV 
protein ORF24 binds to RNA polymerase II and brings it to viral late promoters 
by mimicking and replacing cellular TATA-box-binding protein (TBP). This is 
required for herpesviral late gene expression, a complex and poorly understood 
phase of the viral lifecycle.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.11.026
PMCID: PMC4305015
PMID: 25544563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Viruses reshape the intracellular environment during infection, both to co-opt processes necessary for viral amplification and to subvert antiviral defenses. Studies of virus-host interactions have thus provided a wealth of insight into host biology, including how the manipulation of specific pathways can contribute to disease. Due to genome size constraints, viral proteins are generally multifunctional and have evolved to target diverse cellular machinery. The number of interactions coordinated by individual viral proteomes is therefore anticipated to be substantial, as indicated by recent high throughput proteomics analyses of virus-host protein-protein interactions (PPIs) in mammalian cells ( Pichlmair et al., 2012 ; Rozenblatt-Rosen et al., 2012 ). Systems-level analyses can also reveal infection-linked patterns within cells, as well as pathways or machinery that serve as hubs for viral perturbation ( Hirsch, 2010 ; Navratil et al., 2011 ).

The first comprehensive analyses of protein complexes hijacked by viruses in mammalian cells were recently documented for the RNA viruses human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) using affinity tag/purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS) ( Germain et al., 2013 ; Jager et al., 2011a ). Similar systematic mass spectrometry-based approaches have yet to be applied to DNA viruses, although a number of binary interaction screens using yeast-2-hybrid assays have been reported ( Calderwood et al., 2007 ; Lee et al., 2011 ; Rajagopala et al., 2011 ; Uetz et al., 2006 ). DNA viruses can have significantly greater coding capacity relative to their RNA virus counterparts and generally exhibit genome amplification and gene expression strategies that more closely mimic those of the host.

Herpesviruses are among the largest mammalian DNA viruses identified to date, encoding 70 to over 230 proteins. Divided into three subfamilies (α, β, and γ), herpesvirus infections have diverse pathogenic outcomes that are frequently serious in immunocompromised individuals. For example, the majority of lethal AIDS-associated cancers are caused by human γ-herpesviruses, including Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS). The etiologic agent of KS is a γ-herpesvirus termed Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), which is also associated with the B cell lymphoproliferative disorders multicentric Castleman’s disease and primary effusion lymphoma.

The KSHV life cycle is divided into lytic and latent transcriptional programs. Latency is the stage primarily linked to neoplastic disease, as the restricted subset of viral genes expressed during this phase generally manipulate growth regulatory pathways. All viral proteins are expressed during lytic replication, which is when progeny virion production occurs. Both lytic and latent KSHV infection result in broad changes in cellular metabolism and gene expression. KSHV encodes an estimated 89 proteins, including immune modulators and signaling proteins that have been ‘pirated’ from the host, as well as proteins broadly conserved within the herpesvirus family involved in viral replication. However, the majority of KSHV-encoded proteins remain uncharacterized with a relatively small number of PPIs identified.

Here, we sought to gain a global perspective on how a large DNA virus interfaces with its host by assembling a PPI network for KSHV proteins in human cells. This network is the largest host-pathogen interactome constructed to date, as well as the first comprehensive PPI map for a DNA virus in mammalian cells. We use it to study a virus-human hybrid transcription pre-initiation complex (PIC) with an essential role in directing viral late gene expression. This PIC incorporates functional mimicry of the human TATA-box-binding protein (TBP) with direct recruitment of cellular RNA polymerase II, suggesting a system that merges principles underlying both eukaryotic and prokaryotic transcriptional regulation.

DISCUSSION

Here, we present the largest whole virus-host interactome defined to date. Host genes that interact with more highly conserved viral proteins show significantly elevated rates of positive selection across mammals. This effect diminishes for the more recently evolved KSHV-specific viral proteins, consistent with restricted contact across the expanses of the host-pathogen phylogenetic trees. However, the interactors of these KSHV-specific proteins show a dramatic increase in signatures of recent natural selection within human populations. We therefore speculate that KSHV may have contributed to shaping patterns of human genetic variation over the last 10,000–30,000 years.

There is significant overlap between the virus-host interactomes of KSHV and HIV-1, with high confidence targets of nearly every HIV-1 protein present in the overlapping PPI set. This overlap is notable, because although these two viruses are pathologically linked (particularly in the case of KSHV-induced diseases), they have distinct life cycles and replication strategies. As more systematic interaction data sets emerge, it will be of interest to examine whether any of these overlapping partners are present within additional virus-host interactomes. In this regard, core host pathways that are reiteratively targeted by invading pathogens could generate signals akin to ‘patterns of pathogenesis’ that are recognized by the innate immune system as markers of viral infection ( Vance et al., 2009 ).

There are several strengths in our systematic approach that lead to a robust PPI network. First is our ability to identify reproducible and specific interactions, which should serve as the basis for future hypothesis-driven studies to probe their role in the KSHV life cycle. We demonstrated that the PPI network could accurately predict known protein functions and, in the case of viral latency factors, was enriched for proteins linked to cancer. Our standardized pipeline also eliminates the inherent difficulties in cross-comparisons of individual PPI experiments. That said, the network likely underestimates the number of interactions coordinated by KSHV. It does not capture PPIs driven by complexes comprised of multiple viral proteins and excludes some biologically relevant interactions that were detected but de-prioritized by MiST due to low specificity.

Directed by the interactome, we gained insight into a poorly understood stage of γ-herpesvirus gene expression ( Figure 7 ). Late genes of all DNA viruses become transcriptionally active only after the onset of viral DNA replication and produce proteins necessary for progeny virion assembly. Foundational work in related herpesviruses has revealed a complex of six viral proteins to be essential for late gene expression and recruitment of Pol II ( Arumugaswami et al., 2006 ; Aubry et al., 2014 ; Jia et al., 2004 ; Perng et al., 2014 ; Wong et al., 2007 ; Wu et al., 2009 ). Although the precise roles of each of these factors remain unknown, the ORF24 orthologs in related herpesviruses have been shown to exhibit sequence-specific DNA binding activity and display predicted structural homology to TBP ( Gruffat et al., 2012 ; Wyrwicz and Rychlewski, 2007 ). We find that ORF24 but no other KSHV proteins binds Pol II, indicating that it is the late gene transcription factor that mediates polymerase recruitment to KSHV late promoters. Furthermore, the observation that ORF24 but not TBP occupies the KSHV K8.1 late promoter in vivo suggests that ORF24 functionally replaces TBP specifically at late gene PICs. This interaction occurs through the atypical TATA box (TATT) characteristic of late promoters and requires ORF24 residues that are spatially and functionally similar to the DNA binding residues of TBP. These data support the hypothesis that KSHV ORF24 and its orthologs function as the first described viral TBP mimics ( Wyrwicz and Rychlewski, 2007 ), orchestrating the assembly of a novel virus-host hybrid transcription complex.

TBP serves as a critical nucleation factor for PIC assembly, including at promoters lacking a TATA box ( Thomas and Chiang, 2006 ). However, unlike ORF24, TBP does not directly bind Pol II; the polymerase is instead brought to the TBP-bound promoter through interactions with TFIIB and additional transcription associated factors ( Murakami et al., 2013 ). The low degree of sequence homology between ORF24 and TBP makes it unlikely that ORF24 is able to associate with a similar cohort of TAFs and GTFs, a notion supported by the selectivity of the ORF24-Pol II interaction. Thus, cellular GTF recruitment to late promoters may instead occur through other viral or cellular proteins that perhaps join the ORF24-bound DNA. ORF24-directed recruitment of Pol II could also enable late genes to bypass select regulatory factors required for canonical eukaryotic promoter activation.

While proteins from other viruses have been reported to interact with Pol II, ORF24 is unique in its ability to coordinately bind Pol II and promoter DNA ( Dorjsuren et al., 1998 ; Engelhardt et al., 2005 ; Mavankal et al., 1996 ; Takramah et al., 2003 ; Zhou and Knipe, 2002 ). This is reminiscent of prokaryotic sigma factors, which compete to bind the RNA polymerase holoenzyme and are required for selective promoter recognition and initiation ( Osterberg et al., 2011 ). It is possible that herpesviruses have evolved an analogous strategy to secure sufficient levels of Pol II for strong late gene expression late in infection, a time when the cell is stressed and perhaps constrained for resources. DNA viruses likely display significant variety in PIC composition, including in the core GTFs as has been shown for some cell cycle-regulated promoters ( Guglielmi et al., 2013 ). Future studies of the regulation of late genes are therefore anticipated to uncover other novel modes of transcriptional regulation with parallels in mammalian cells.
