---
pmid: '9619837'
title: The BRCA2 is a histone acetyltransferase.
authors:
- Siddique H
- Zou JP
- Rao VN
- Reddy ES
journal: Oncogene
year: '1998'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC6754178
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1202003
---

# The BRCA2 is a histone acetyltransferase.
**Authors:** Siddique H, Zou JP, Rao VN, Reddy ES
**Journal:** Oncogene (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1202003](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1202003)
**PMC:** [PMC6754178](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6754178/)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 1998 Apr 30;16(17):2283-5. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1202003.

The BRCA2 is a histone acetyltransferase.

Siddique H(1), Zou JP, Rao VN, Reddy ES.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Allegheny University of the Health Sciences, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102, USA.

Patients carrying mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 tumor suppressor genes have shown 
to have high risk in developing breast and ovarian cancers. Two potential 
functions of BRCA2 were proposed which includes role in the regulation of 
transcription and also in DNA repair. Forty-five-amino acid region encoded by 
exon 3 of BRCA2 was shown to have transcriptional activation function. Recent 
studies of the several enzymes involved in acetylation and deacetylation of 
histone residues have revealed a possible relationship between gene 
transcriptional activation and histone acetylation. Since BRCA2 appear to 
function as a transcriptional factor, we have tested for Histone acetyl 
transferase (HAT) activity of BRCA2. Here, we present evidence that BRCA2 has 
intrinsic HAT activity, which maps to the amino-terminal region of BRCA2. Our 
results demonstrate that BRCA2 proteins acetylate primarily H3 and H4 of free 
histones. These observations suggest that HAT activity of BRCA2 may play an 
important role in the regulation of transcription and tumor suppressor function.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1202003
PMID: 9619837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Patients with germline heterozygous mutations in BRCA2 are predisposed to develop breast and ovarian cancers at a higher rate compared to the general population ( Mavaddat et al., 2013 ). Tumors arising in these carriers often exhibit loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at the second BRCA2 allele, resulting in defective homologous recombination DNA repair pathways (HRRs) ( Lord and Ashworth, 2016 ; Venkitaraman, 2014 ). BRCA2 -mutant-driven breast tumors are enriched for the “luminal B” intrinsic molecular subtype ( van der Groep et al., 2011 ) and frequently exhibit increased genomic instability, leading to high mutational burdens.

It remains unclear whether genomic instability is a direct consequence of BRCA2 -mutation-associated defects in HRRs, especially as BRCA2 LOH often arises concomitant with p53 loss. Chronic reliance on the alternative and error-prone non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) pathway is posited to cause an accumulation of somatic mutations as “early events” that ultimately drive tumor initiation ( Deng, 2001 ). Conversely, one functional BRCA2 allele may be sufficient for cellular maintenance, but rare circumstances may cause a transient impairment of BRCA2 function, during which time a high-fidelity DNA-damage response cannot be fully supported. We term this acute incident of BRCA2 deficiency “BRCA2-crisis.” For example, it has recently been demonstrated that exposure to environmental aldehydes can transiently impair BRCA2 function in cells ( Tacconi et al., 2017 ; Tan et al., 2017 ). Repeated periods of BRCA2-crisis could subsequently lead to pre-malignant changes and, ultimately, tumor initiation, with genomic instability occurring as a by-product of transformation and as a “late event.”

These competing theories underscore the need for a better understanding of the earliest genetic and epigenetic changes that occur at the onset of BRCA2-deficient cancer. Prophylactic mastectomy remains the most effective preventative therapy for breast cancer in women with BRCA2 mutations. Since BRCA2 carriers have up to a 65% risk of developing cancer by the age of 70 ( Nielsen et al., 2016 ), development of additional non-invasive alternatives remain important. Paradoxically, despite the frequent LOH by genetic or epigenetic means in tumors, modeling this event remains challenging, due to the embryonic lethality observed in knockout mice ( Evers and Jonkers, 2006 ). Permanent ablation of BRCA2 expression at either the transcriptional or the post-transcriptional level through CRISPR or short hairpin RNA (shRNA) modalities in non-transformed cell lines leads to growth arrest ( Feng and Jasin, 2017 ), rendering these in vitro models less informative with regard to malignant transformation.

Here, we use transient depletion of BRCA2 expression (“BRCA2-crisis”) in non-transformed human breast epithelial cell lines to study early changes associated with malignant transformation. In contrast to models using heterozygous cell lines, this system incurs a primary BRCA2-crisis event in naive cells and provides a unique ability to separate epigenetic changes from genomic mutations. Specifically in BRCA2-depleted conditions, after allowing for the cells to recover and re-establish BRCA2 expression, we discover the establishment of different epigenetic patterns, primarily in the form of chromatin states associated with histone acetylation, in the absence of recurrent genomic mutations. These chromatin changes are associated with nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) signaling that drives proliferation in non-permissive EGF-free conditions, which may model an early step in carcinogenesis. These findings identify a pathway for potential therapeutic intervention to prevent cancer onset and provide a platform to further investigate molecular changes that occur in a preneoplastic setting.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we establish an in vitro model of BRCA2-crisis with the aim of identifying early, pre-neoplastic molecular alterations. This transient knockdown approach is unique compared to systems focused on heterozygous cell lines or BRCA2-deficient tumors. The difference in gene expression profiles from normal mammary tissues between BRCA2 +/− and BRCA2 +/+ individuals supports the idea that BRCA2 deficiency leads to divergent transcriptional phenotypes prior to oncogenic transformation and LOH. By leveraging a primary BRCA2-crisis in naive mammary cells, we have uncovered an immediate chromatin remodeling response to an acute BRCA2 deficiency. This may be driven, in part, by the discovery of the innate ability of BRCA2 to bind chromatin directly in normal, naive settings. Decreased BRCA2 levels leads to a chromatin remodeling response coupled to NF-κB activation, whereupon transition to EGF-free media induces downstream regulation of genes similar to that observed in BRCA2 -mutation carriers. Additionally, BRCA2 heterozygosity was modeled with patient-derived iPSCs to confirm that epithelial-differentiated cells have similarly altered histone acetylation. Taken together, the data suggest that this response confers a BRCA2-crisis-induced growth advantage that may model incipient events that precede neoplasia onset.

EGF stimulation and binding to its nominal receptor, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), regulates cellular proliferation and survival through activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/JNK/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathways. Hyperactive EGFR signaling is common in breast cancer, where EGFR or HER-2 overexpression, or somatic acquisition of constitutively active, ligand-independent mutants such as EGFRvIII, enhance tumorigenic potential and is associated with poor outcomes ( Gan et al., 2013 ; Masuda et al., 2012 ; Tang et al., 2000 ). As the EGFR signaling axis remains the focus of many targeted therapies involving small molecule inhibitors ( Ali and Wendt, 2017 ; Zhang et al., 2009 ), the acquisition of EGF-independent growth in a pre-neoplastic setting may have implications for understanding tumor initiation.

It should be noted a combination of BRCA2-crisis and EGF-free conditions were required to confer an advantage in ortho-topic mammary xenografts. In this regard, BRCA2-crisis may not confer bona-fide malignant transformation on its own. Instead, BRCA2-crisis may drive an initial step toward disease, and when combined with additional environmental stress, such as growth factor limitation, these molecular changes may serve to prime abnormal growth patterns. Indeed, the EGF-free conditions described here may also model the in vivo environment of normal breast tissue. For example, it has been shown that circulating EGF is limiting for mammary development and tumorigenesis ( Kurachi et al., 1985 ; Vonderhaar, 1987 ). Since the mammary gland is subject to many changes that occur during natural events such as involution, pregnancy, and lactation, it is possible that the molecular changes we report here may reflect the enactment of physiologically normal cellular processes. However, because these alterations are spurred specifically by BRCA2-crisis, it suggests that driving normal processes outside of a physiologic context may underlie malignant transformation.

This study identifies two related mechanisms associated with BRCA2-crisis: NF-κB activation and increased lysine acetylation on histone H4. These processes are linked in that impairment of NF-κB activation diminished lysine acetylation after BRCA2-crisis. We also show here that BRCA2 possesses chromatin-binding ability and that BRCA2-crisis directs an NF-κB transcriptional response. This NF-κB activation was a transient, but acute, response after BRCA2-crisis, perhaps related to the fact that the chromatin changes observed also do not persist indefinitely. Since the NF-κB transcriptional profile, along with the associated downstream cell-proliferative phenotype, remains established well beyond this peak in passage 3, the acute relA phosphorylation we report here may be representative of the initiation of a typical phosphorylation/de-phosphorylation signaling cascade.

The NF-κB pathway is also subject to BRCA1 transcriptional co-activation ( Gardini et al., 2014 ) and is deregulated in BRCA1-deficient breast tissue ( Sau et al., 2016 ). Thus, although siRNAs targeted to BRCA1 did not lead to the same EGF-independent growth phenotype, our data do not exclude that a similar BRCA-crisis could underlie the expansion of progenitor cells in BRCA1 -carrier breast tissue. Both BRCA1 and BRCA2 are recruited to sites containing double-stranded breaks ( Lord and Ashworth, 2016 ). These may represent periods when lower cellular levels of functional BRCA2 may be insufficient and, thus, represent a BRCA-crisis event. In this setting, to fulfill the urgent need for BRCA2 at double-stranded breaks, BRCA2 may be recruited away from chromatin, ultimately leading to a cascade of epigenetic and transcriptional responses. Although BRCA1 -induced breast cancer can be derived from a luminal precursor cell ( Molyneux et al., 2010 ), the relevant cell of origin for BRCA2 -induced breast cancer remains uncertain ( Venkitaraman, 2014 ). Our model of in vitro BRCA2-crisis provides a tractable system in which to explore various genomic backgrounds to identify this cell of origin, such as ER+ or p53 mutant cells.

Additionally, work by others ( Kim et al., 2012 ) has shown that the NF-κB p65 subunit associates at promoters together with the TIP60 histone acetyltransferase, which has acetyltransferase activity against the tail of histone H4. As TIP60 acetyltransferase activity is increased by DNA damage, one could speculate that NF-κB and TIP60 co-localize to promoters after BRCA2-crisis, resulting in histone H4 acetylation and increased transcriptional output. Therefore, inhibition of this transcriptional axis could represent a molecular target for abrogation of the BRCA2-crisis response.

A single brief yet acute exposure to BRCA2-crisis is sufficient to drive this phenotype transiently in vitro , yet organisms may experience multiple crises over time with unknown cumulative effects. Our isogenic iPSCs revealed that some of the effects of BRCA2-crisis on chromatin–namely, H4K12Ac–are also apparent in cells heterozygous for BRCA2 . As we do not observe differences in histone acetylation in pluripotent cells, these results could indicate that differentiation itself triggers a BRCA2-crisis event, perhaps concomitant with diminished BRCA2 levels during differentiation. Future studies and defined mammary differentiation protocols are required to establish the circumstances that constitute physiological BRCA2-crisis and the impact of prolonged and chronic BRCA2 deficiency due to genetic haploinsufficiency. Further work will also be able to determine the therapeutic value and viability of inhibiting this pathway in terms of preventing cancer onset.
