---
pmid: '17525340'
title: Abraxas and RAP80 form a BRCA1 protein complex required for the DNA damage
  response.
authors:
- Wang B
- Matsuoka S
- Ballif BA
- Zhang D
- Smogorzewska A
- Gygi SP
- Elledge SJ
journal: Science
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC3573690
doi: 10.1126/science.1139476
---

# Abraxas and RAP80 form a BRCA1 protein complex required for the DNA damage response.
**Authors:** Wang B, Matsuoka S, Ballif BA, Zhang D, Smogorzewska A, Gygi SP, Elledge SJ
**Journal:** Science (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1139476](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1139476)
**PMC:** [PMC3573690](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3573690/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2007 May 25;316(5828):1194-8. doi: 10.1126/science.1139476.

Abraxas and RAP80 form a BRCA1 protein complex required for the DNA damage 
response.

Wang B(1), Matsuoka S, Ballif BA, Zhang D, Smogorzewska A, Gygi SP, Elledge SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Center for Genetics and Genomics, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
02115, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2007 May 25;316(5828):1138-9. doi: 10.1126/science.1143700.

The BRCT repeats of the breast and ovarian cancer predisposition protein BRCA1 
are essential for tumor suppression. Phosphopeptide affinity proteomic analysis 
identified a protein, Abraxas, that directly binds the BRCA1 BRCT repeats 
through a phospho-Ser-X-X-Phe motif. Abraxas binds BRCA1 to the mutual exclusion 
of BACH1 (BRCA1-associated C-terminal helicase) and CtIP (CtBP-interacting 
protein), forming a third type of BRCA1 complex. Abraxas recruits the 
ubiquitin-interacting motif (UIM)-containing protein RAP80 to BRCA1. Both 
Abraxas and RAP80 were required for DNA damage resistance, G(2)-M checkpoint 
control, and DNA repair. RAP80 was required for optimal accumulation of BRCA1 on 
damaged DNA (foci) in response to ionizing radiation, and the UIM domains alone 
were capable of foci formation. The RAP80-Abraxas complex may help recruit BRCA1 
to DNA damage sites in part through recognition of ubiquitinated proteins.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1139476
PMCID: PMC3573690
PMID: 17525340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The BRCT repeats of BRCA1 are essential for tumor suppression. Phospho-peptide affinity proteomic analysis identified a novel protein, Abraxas, that directly binds the BRCA1 BRCT repeats through a phospho-SXXF motif. Abraxas binds BRCA1 mutually exclusively with BACH1 and CTIP, forming a third Brca1 complex. Abraxas recruits the ubiquitin-interacting motif (UIM) containing protein Rap80 to BRCA1. Both Abraxas and Rap80 are required for DNA damage resistance, G2/M checkpoint control and DNA repair. Rap80 is required for a subset of Brca1-foci formation in response to IR and the UIM domains alone are capable of foci formation. The Rap80/Abraxas complex may help recruit Brca1 to DNA damage sites in part through recognition of ubiquitinated proteins.
