---
pmid: '15115758'
title: Direct interaction of FANCD2 with BRCA2 in DNA damage response pathways.
authors:
- Hussain S
- Wilson JB
- Medhurst AL
- Hejna J
- Witt E
- Ananth S
- Davies A
- Masson JY
- Moses R
- West SC
- de Winter JP
- Ashworth A
- Jones NJ
- Mathew CG
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC10592106
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddh135
---

# Direct interaction of FANCD2 with BRCA2 in DNA damage response pathways.
**Authors:** Hussain S, Wilson JB, Medhurst AL, Hejna J, Witt E, Ananth S, Davies A, Masson JY, Moses R, West SC, de Winter JP, Ashworth A, Jones NJ, Mathew CG
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddh135](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddh135)
**PMC:** [PMC10592106](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10592106/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Jun 15;13(12):1241-8. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddh135. Epub 2004
Apr  28.

Direct interaction of FANCD2 with BRCA2 in DNA damage response pathways.

Hussain S(1), Wilson JB, Medhurst AL, Hejna J, Witt E, Ananth S, Davies A, 
Masson JY, Moses R, West SC, de Winter JP, Ashworth A, Jones NJ, Mathew CG.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Development, Guy's, King's and St Thomas's School of 
Medicine, King's College London, UK.

Fanconi anaemia (FA) is a chromosomal instability disorder characterized by 
cellular sensitivity to DNA interstrand crosslinking agents and a high risk of 
cancer. Six of the eight proteins encoded by the known FA genes form a nuclear 
complex which is required for the monoubiquitination of the FANCD2 protein. 
FANCD2 complexes and colocalizes with BRCA1, but its presumptive role in DNA 
repair has not yet been clearly defined. We used yeast two-hybrid analysis to 
test for interaction between FANCD2 and 10 proteins involved in homologous 
recombination repair. FANCD2 did not interact with RAD51, the five RAD51 
paralogs, RAD52, RAD54 or DMC1. However, it bound to a highly conserved 
C-terminal site in BRCA2 that also binds FANCG/XRCC9. FANCD2 and BRCA2 can be 
coimmunoprecipitated from cell extracts of both human and Chinese hamster 
wild-type cells, thus confirming that the interaction occurs in vivo. Formation 
of nuclear foci of FANCD2 was normal in the BRCA2 mutant CAPAN-1 cells, which 
indicates that the recruitment of FANCD2 to sites of DNA-repair is independent 
of wild-type BRCA2 function. FANCD2 colocalized with RAD51 in foci following 
treatment with mitomycin C or hydroxyurea, and colocalized very tightly with 
PCNA after treatment with hydroxyurea. These findings suggest that FANCD2 may 
have a role in the cellular response to stalled replication forks or in the 
repair of replication-associated double-strand breaks, irrespective of the type 
of primary DNA lesion.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddh135
PMID: 15115758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

The occurrence of oncogene-induced replication stress (OIRS) is a common early event in the multistep process of cancer development 1 . Activation of oncogenes such as CYCLIN E or c-MYC leads to replication stress (RS), signified by reduced replication fork speed, through deregulation of cell cycle progression or transcription programs that result in fork collapses and one-ended double-strand breaks (DSBs) 2 – 5 . Clinically, targeting oncoproteins has proven problematic, thus an alternative targeted approach is to focus on pathways that enable survival under OIRS 6 .

In the context of OIRS, CCNE1 is one of the most thoroughly studied oncogenes owing to its frequent overexpression and association with poor patient outcome 7 – 9 . Through its CDK2 activator function, overexpression of CYCLIN E has been demonstrated to shorten G1 phase, promote premature S-phase entry and reduce the number of licensed replication origins while increasing the proportion of firing origins, leading to increased conflicts between transcription and replication machineries 10 . CYCLIN E overexpression also causes fork slowing, fork reversal and nucleotide depletion, ultimately resulting in DNA breaks and DNA damage response (DDR) activation during G2/M and chromosomal instability 10 – 13 . CYCLIN E-induced RS results in activation of ATR and, downstream, CHK1 kinases which regulate a multitude of RS response pathways to limit DNA damage and restrict nucleolytic processing of unresolved replication intermediates to G2/M phase 13 . This notion is supported by synthetic lethal interactions between CYCLIN E overexpression and ATR or CHK1 inhibition, which is accompanied by massive DNA damage, threatening cancer cell survival 14 . However, despite their relevance for cancer treatment, pathways that counteract the deleterious effects of OIRS remain incompletely understood.

Fanconi anaemia (FA) signalling is one of the major pathways that maintain genomic integrity through recruitment and stabilisation of components of DDR pathways, such as the homologous recombination repair (HRR) proteins BRCA1/2 15 – 17 . While the classical function of the FA pathway is the repair of inter-strand crosslinks (ICLs), its crucial roles in counteracting RS have become increasingly apparent 18 . The key FA proteins, FANCD2 and FANCI, safeguard stalled replication forks 19 and facilitate new origin firing 20 . When replication forks stall, FANCD2-FANCI (ID2) dimers are recruited to chromatin, clamp around DNA and become monoubiquitinated 21 – 23 . Although ID2 clamp closure occurs independently of FANCD2 monoubiquitination, this modification stabilizes the clamped conformation 21 – 24 . The deubiquitinating enzyme USP1 in complex with UAF1 can remove monoubiquitin from FANCD2 25 , presumably to promote the re-opening of the ID2 clamp. However, how the fully engaged di-mono-ubiquitinated complex (Ub-FANCD2-Ub-FANCI), which is no longer a substrate for USP1-UAF1 24 , is removed, remains elusive. Nevertheless, this step is critical to complete the pathway once conditions are permissive for replication fork recovery. Here, we show that SCF-FBXL12 acts as an E3 ligase that polyubiquitinates and targets CHK1-phosphorylated FANCD2 for proteasomal degradation. This mechanism is crucial for replication recovery and cell survival in the context of CYCLIN E overexpression or WEE1 inhibition.

DISCUSSION

In this study we show that FBXL12-mediated polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of FANCD2 at stalled replication forks promotes fork recovery and DNA synthesis in the context of CYCLIN E- and drug-induced RS ( Fig. S11 ). To activate FA signalling, ATR-phosphorylates FANCI, enabling monoubiquitination of both FANCI and FANCD2 by the FA core complex 20 . This modification triggers a structural change, resulting in the formation of a stable clamped ID2 complex encircling the DNA 21 , 23 . De-ubiquitination of the monoubiquitinated ID2 complex by USP1-UAF1 stimulates its unloading from chromatin and knockdown of USP1 impairs subsequent DNA repair steps 59 . It is presently unclear how USP1 catalyses de-ubiquitination of the ID2 complex as monoubiquitinated FANCI occludes the USP1 interaction site in FANCD2 60 . Additionally, extraction of DNA bound ID2 complex may be initiated through sumoylation-ubiquitination involving the DVC1-p97 segregase complex, limiting ID2 dosage on chromatin 61 .

Failure to remove the ID2 complex may lead to replication barriers that exacerbate DNA damage during replication stress, ultimately causing genome instability. Our findings shed light on the rapid removal of the ID2 complex, even in its di-monoubiquitinated (USP1-resistant) state, preventing potential replication obstacles. FBXL12 depletion and FANCD2 accumulation on chromatin not only reduced replication fork processivity and increased the proportion of stalled replication forks but also led to increased origin firing, seemingly contradictory to a report indicating an inhibitory effect of FANCD2 on dormant origin firing 20 . This could be explained by several observations: Firstly, stabilisation of FANCD2 also results in elevated levels of FANCI, possibly by formation of stable FANCD2-FANCI heterodimers 62 . Secondly, FANCI was attributed an activating role in dormant origin firing under mild RS conditions, however, phosphorylated FANCI is likely excluded from dormant origins as high RS resulted in sustained ATR-CHK1 activation and reduced dormant origin firing in the cited study 20 . Thirdly, we observed decreased amounts of FANCI present at chromatin in FANCD2-negative PD20 cells and following knockdown of FANCD2 in cancer cells. Thus, the likelihood of new origin firing is expected to vary based on the specific cell context and differ depending on the intensity and timing of RS.

Although both CHK1 and FANCD2 are general effectors of ATR signaling and DNA replication stress, ATR and CHK1 also have distinct functions. For instance, CHK1 inhibition leads to phosphorylation of ATR targets causing increased replication initiation and DNA strand breaks 63 . In addition, cancer synthetic lethality between ATR and CHK1 has been linked to increased CDK-dependent origin firing 64 . Our data show that CHK1 facilitates polyubiquitination of FANCD2 by FBXL12, presumably targeting of a pool of FANCD2 on chromatin that needs to be removed to allow replication recovery once conditions are favorable. Interestingly, slower fork progression in CHK1-inhibited cells is not caused by the excessive firing of new origins but was shown to result from the accumulation of replication barriers that compromise cell proliferation 65 . Evidently, spatiotemporal differences in CHK1 activity, early versus late replication origins and origin density will influence the local concentration of CHK1 at a particular fork/origin, further finetuning replication recovery with cell cycle progression. High expression of FANCD2 does not per se result in deregulation of fork dynamics, rather our data suggest that it is the decreased FANCD2 protein turnover at replication forks that delays recovery. Analogously to other DNA repair factors recruited and trapped on DNA, such as PARP1 in the presence of PARP1 inhibitors, we suggest that defective turnover of FANCD2 results in a more severe functional impairment than complete FANCD2 loss under conditions of high RS, which may be due to increased difficulty in resorting to alternative pathways 66 . Elevated levels of FBXL12 and FANCD2 were observed in aggressive malignancies, particularly susceptible to high replication stress, and linked to unfavourable patient outcomes. This suggests that activation of the FBXL12-FANCD2 pathway may potentially contribute to development of drug resistance and that 67 , 68 FBXL12 could represent a potential cancer target, specifically in cancers exhibiting CYCLIN E overexpression and/or deregulation of CYCLIN E-CDK2 activity, for instance in tumours with CCNE1 amplification or inactivation of the tumour suppressor gene FBXW7 69 . Intriguingly, CYCLIN E overexpression was shown to sensitise BLBCs to WEE1 inhibitor AZD1775 and PARP inhibition 70 , 71 , and we demonstrate here that depletion of FBXL12 further sensitises cancer cells with moderate levels of CYCLIN E. Additionally, CHK1 inhibition induces RS and synthetic lethality in CYCLIN E overexpressing cells, as well as in MYC-driven lymphomas 14 , 72 , indicating that the FBXL12-CHK1-FANCD2 axis might constitute a more general pathway for therapeutic intervention in cancers with high RS.

In summary, our study demonstrates that FBXL12 is a crucial suppressor of DNA replication stress through its function as an SCF substrate receptor for FANCD2. This pathway is vital for the survival of cancer cells under conditions of high RS, findings that may have important medical implications.

STAR★Methods

References from key resource table : 10 , 20 , 32 , 45 , 52 , 73 – 81
