---
pmid: '11877377'
title: SMC1 is a downstream effector in the ATM/NBS1 branch of the human S-phase checkpoint.
authors:
- Yazdi PT
- Wang Y
- Zhao S
- Patel N
- Lee EY
- Qin J
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2002'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC155356
doi: 10.1101/gad.970702
---

# SMC1 is a downstream effector in the ATM/NBS1 branch of the human S-phase checkpoint.
**Authors:** Yazdi PT, Wang Y, Zhao S, Patel N, Lee EY, Qin J
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.970702](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.970702)
**PMC:** [PMC155356](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC155356/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2002 Mar 1;16(5):571-82. doi: 10.1101/gad.970702.

SMC1 is a downstream effector in the ATM/NBS1 branch of the human S-phase 
checkpoint.

Yazdi PT(1), Wang Y, Zhao S, Patel N, Lee EY, Qin J.

Author information:
(1)Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and 
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) proteins (SMC1, SMC3) are 
evolutionarily conserved chromosomal proteins that are components of the cohesin 
complex, necessary for sister chromatid cohesion. These proteins may also 
function in DNA repair. Here we report that SMC1 is a component of the DNA 
damage response network that functions as an effector in the ATM/NBS1-dependent 
S-phase checkpoint pathway. SMC1 associates with BRCA1 and is phosphorylated in 
response to IR in an ATM- and NBS1-dependent manner. Using mass spectrometry, we 
established that ATM phosphorylates S957 and S966 of SMC1 in vivo. 
Phosphorylation of S957 and/or S966 of SMC1 is required for activation of the 
S-phase checkpoint in response to IR. We also discovered that the 
phosphorylation of NBS1 by ATM is required for the phosphorylation of SMC1, 
establishing the role of NBS1 as an adaptor in the ATM/NBS1/SMC1 pathway. The 
ATM/CHK2/CDC25A pathway is also involved in the S-phase checkpoint activation, 
but this pathway is intact in NBS cells. Our results indicate that the 
ATM/NBS1/SMC1 pathway is a separate branch of the S-phase checkpoint pathway, 
distinct from the ATM/CHK2/CDC25A branch. Therefore, this work establishes the 
ATM/NBS1/SMC1 branch, and provides a molecular basis for the S-phase checkpoint 
defect in NBS cells.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.970702
PMCID: PMC155356
PMID: 11877377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) proteins (SMC1, SMC3) are evolutionarily conserved chromosomal proteins that are components of the cohesin complex, necessary for sister chromatid cohesion. These proteins may also function in DNA repair. Here we report that SMC1 is a component of the DNA damage response network that functions as an effector in the ATM/NBS1-dependent S-phase checkpoint pathway. SMC1 associates with BRCA1 and is phosphorylated in response to IR in an ATM- and NBS1-dependent manner. Using mass spectrometry, we established that ATM phosphorylates S957 and S966 of SMC1 in vivo. Phosphorylation of S957 and/or S966 of SMC1 is required for activation of the S-phase checkpoint in response to IR. We also discovered that the phosphorylation of NBS1 by ATM is required for the phosphorylation of SMC1, establishing the role of NBS1 as an adaptor in the ATM/NBS1/SMC1 pathway. The ATM/CHK2/CDC25A pathway is also involved in the S-phase checkpoint activation, but this pathway is intact in NBS cells. Our results indicate that the ATM/NBS1/SMC1 pathway is a separate branch of the S-phase checkpoint pathway, distinct from the ATM/CHK2/CDC25A branch. Therefore, this work establishes the ATM/NBS1/SMC1 branch, and provides a molecular basis for the S-phase checkpoint defect in NBS cells.

Discussion

In this study, we established that SMC1 of the structural maintenance of chromosomes proteins is a component of the DNA damage response network. Data presented here show that SMC1 is a downstream effector of ATM and NBS1 in the activation of the IR-induced S-phase checkpoint. We also discovered that the phosphorylation of NBS1 by ATM is required for the phosphorylation of SMC1, establishing the role of NBS1 as an adaptor in the ATM/NBS1/SMC1 pathway. The ATM/CHK2/CDC25A pathway is also involved in S-phase checkpoint activation ( Falck et al. 2001 ). We found that this pathway is intact in NBS cells. Our results indicate that the ATM/NBS1/SMC1 pathway is a separate branch of the S-phase checkpoint pathway, distinct from the ATM/CHK2/CDC25A branch (Fig. 8 c). Thus, this work establishes the ATM/NBS1/SMC1 branch of the S-phase checkpoint in response to IR, and provides a molecular basis for the S-phase checkpoint defect in NBS cells.
