---
pmid: '17289571'
title: A mechanism for cell-cycle regulation of MAP kinase signaling in a yeast differentiation
  pathway.
authors:
- Strickfaden SC
- Winters MJ
- Ben-Ari G
- Lamson RE
- Tyers M
- Pryciak PM
journal: Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1847584
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.12.032
---

# A mechanism for cell-cycle regulation of MAP kinase signaling in a yeast differentiation pathway.
**Authors:** Strickfaden SC, Winters MJ, Ben-Ari G, Lamson RE, Tyers M, Pryciak PM
**Journal:** Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2006.12.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2006.12.032)
**PMC:** [PMC1847584](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1847584/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2007 Feb 9;128(3):519-31. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.12.032.

A mechanism for cell-cycle regulation of MAP kinase signaling in a yeast 
differentiation pathway.

Strickfaden SC(1), Winters MJ, Ben-Ari G, Lamson RE, Tyers M, Pryciak PM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2007 Feb 9;128(3):441-4. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.01.018.

Yeast cells arrest in the G1 phase of the cell cycle upon exposure to mating 
pheromones. As cells commit to a new cycle, G1 CDK activity (Cln/CDK) inhibits 
signaling through the mating MAPK cascade. Here we show that the target of this 
inhibition is Ste5, the MAPK cascade scaffold protein. Cln/CDK disrupts Ste5 
membrane localization by phosphorylating a cluster of sites that flank a small, 
basic, membrane-binding motif in Ste5. Effective inhibition of Ste5 signaling 
requires multiple phosphorylation sites and a substantial accumulation of 
negative charge, which suggests that Ste5 acts as a sensor for high G1 CDK 
activity. Thus, Ste5 is an integration point for both external and internal 
signals. When Ste5 cannot be phosphorylated, pheromone triggers an aberrant 
arrest of cells outside G1 either in the presence or absence of the 
CDK-inhibitor protein Far1. These findings define a mechanism and physiological 
benefit of restricting antiproliferative signaling to G1.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.12.032
PMCID: PMC1847584
PMID: 17289571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

Cellular decisions are commonly regulated by external signals via mitogen activated protein (MAP) kinase cascades ( Qi and Elion, 2005 ). Though widely appreciated to stimulate cell proliferation, MAP kinase pathways can also regulate cell differentiation. Relatively little is known about how differentiation and antiproliferative signals may be integrated with, or counteracted by, the cell division status of individual cells. In yeast, mating pheromones activate a MAP kinase cascade to trigger fusion between two haploid gamete cells ( Dohlman and Thorner, 2001 ). This mating reaction exhibits fundamental hallmarks of differentiation, in that cells exit the cell cycle, induce a unique program of gene expression, and undergo morphogenetic changes that allow them to adopt a new fate. Mating pheromones cause cells to arrest specifically in the G1 stage of the cell cycle, prior to the G1 → S transition step known as “Start”. However, cells that have already passed Start become refractory to pheromone arrest, a property that was used to define Start as a unique point of commitment to a new round of division ( Hartwell et al., 1974 ).

One contributor to the G1 specificity of pheromone arrest involves mutual antagonism between cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) and Far1, a CDK inhibitor ( Chang and Herskowitz, 1990 ). Pheromone signaling in G1 cells allows the MAPK Fus3 to phosphorylate and activate Far1 ( Chang and Herskowitz, 1992 ; Breitkreutz et al., 2001 ), which inhibits CDK activity associated with G1 cyclin (Cln) proteins by an unresolved mechanism ( Peter and Herskowitz, 1994 ; Gartner et al., 1998 ; Jeoung et al., 1998 ). Conversely, as cells pass Start, Cln/CDKs phosphorylate Far1, targeting it for degradation ( McKinney et al., 1993 ; Henchoz et al., 1997 ). However, other mechanisms may play an equally critical role in restricting pheromone arrest to G1, but they are poorly understood. In particular, signal transduction through the MAP kinase cascade is actively inhibited by G1 CDKs, such that pheromone-induced transcription of mating genes (e.g., FUS1 ) is minimized during periods of maximum G1 cyclin expression ( Oehlen and Cross, 1994 ; Wassmann and Ammerer, 1997 ). This results in a period from Start through S phase in which cells are unresponsive to pheromone.

While G1 CDK inhibition of pheromone signaling has been recognized for many years, the target and mechanism have remained elusive. Previous studies suggest that the inhibited step of the signaling pathway lay somewhere between the heterotrimeric G protein βγ dimer (Gβγ) and the first kinase of the MAP kinase cascade, the MAPKKK Ste11 ( Wassmann and Ammerer, 1997 ; Oehlen and Cross, 1998 ). Indeed, Cln2/CDK can phosphorylate the PAK-family kinase Ste20 ( Oehlen and Cross, 1998 ; Wu et al., 1998 ), but removing CDK sites in Ste20 had no effect on the ability of Cln/CDK to inhibit pheromone signaling ( Oda et al., 1999 ), thus failing to confirm Ste20 as a relevant target. In the interim, our understanding of this signaling pathway has advanced considerably.

An important step in activation of the mating pathway (see Figure 1A ) is the plasma membrane recruitment of the MAP kinase cascade scaffold protein, Ste5, by the pheromone-activated Gβγ dimer ( Pryciak and Huntress, 1998 ; Mahanty et al., 1999 ; van Drogen et al., 2001 ; Winters et al., 2005 ). Indeed, artificial targeting of Ste5 to the plasma membrane causes constitutive signaling ( Pryciak and Huntress, 1998 ). Membrane recruitment of Ste5 serves two roles: (1) it promotes activation of Ste11 by its membrane-localized activator, Ste20 ( Pryciak and Huntress, 1998 ; van Drogen et al., 2000 ); and (2) it amplifies signal transmission from active Ste11 through the remainder of the kinase cascade ( Lamson et al., 2006 ). Recently, we found that although Gβγ is the usual trigger for Ste5 recruitment, it is not sufficient. Instead, Ste5 also binds directly to membranes, and the cooperative effect of these two weak interactions (Ste5-Gβγ and Ste5-membrane) controls membrane recruitment ( Winters et al., 2005 ). The Ste5-membrane interaction requires an N-terminal “PM” (plasma membrane) domain, a short basic-rich amphipathic α-helix that binds acidic phospholipid membranes, and which can also target Ste5 to the nucleus when not engaged at the plasma membrane. Gain-of-function mutations in the PM domain cause increased membrane affinity, allowing Ste5 to localize to the plasma membrane and activate signaling even without Gβγ ( Winters et al., 2005 ).

In this study, we report that G1 CDK activity inhibits pheromone signaling by inhibiting Ste5 membrane recruitment. The Ste5 PM domain is flanked by multiple CDK sites that are phosphorylated by G1 CDKs in vivo and in vitro , and the addition of multiple negatively-charged phosphates impedes binding to acidic phospholipid membranes. Furthermore, we show that when CDK regulation of Ste5 is disrupted, pheromone signaling blocks cell cycle progression even after cells pass Start, and even in the absence of Far1, providing a physiological rationale for antagonizing pheromone signaling as cells begin a new division cycle.
