---
pmid: '11463333'
title: Isolation and characterization of two novel A20-like proteins.
authors:
- Evans PC
- Taylor ER
- Coadwell J
- Heyninck K
- Beyaert R
- Kilshaw PJ
journal: Biochem J
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1221992
doi: 10.1042/0264-6021:3570617
---

# Isolation and characterization of two novel A20-like proteins.
**Authors:** Evans PC, Taylor ER, Coadwell J, Heyninck K, Beyaert R, Kilshaw PJ
**Journal:** Biochem J (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1042/0264-6021:3570617](https://doi.org/10.1042/0264-6021:3570617)
**PMC:** [PMC1221992](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1221992/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2001 Aug 1;357(Pt 3):617-23. doi: 10.1042/0264-6021:3570617.

Isolation and characterization of two novel A20-like proteins.

Evans PC(1), Taylor ER, Coadwell J, Heyninck K, Beyaert R, Kilshaw PJ.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Immunology Programme, The Babraham Institute, Babraham, Cambridge 
CB2 4AT, UK. paul.evans@bbsrc.ac.uk

The transcription factor nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappa B) plays a pivotal 
role in inflammatory processes through induction of adhesion molecules and 
chemokines. The zinc finger molecule A20 is an important negative regulator of 
NF-kappa B. The mechanism utilized by A20 is not fully understood, but A20 has 
been shown to bind to tumour-necrosis-factor-receptor-associated factor (TRAF) 
molecules, which are necessary for pro-inflammatory cytokine signalling. We 
report two novel genes, Cezanne (cellular zinc finger anti-NF-kappa B) and 
TRABID (TRAF-binding domain), with sequence similarity to A20. 
Co-immunoprecipitation studies indicated that TRAF6 was able to interact with 
both Cezanne and TRABID. In contrast, reporter gene experiments revealed a 
specific ability of Cezanne to down-regulate NF-kappa B. It is likely, 
therefore, that Cezanne participates in the regulation of inflammatory 
processes.

DOI: 10.1042/0264-6021:3570617
PMCID: PMC1221992
PMID: 11463333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The transcription factor nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappa B) plays a pivotal role in inflammatory processes through induction of adhesion molecules and chemokines. The zinc finger molecule A20 is an important negative regulator of NF-kappa B. The mechanism utilized by A20 is not fully understood, but A20 has been shown to bind to tumour-necrosis-factor-receptor-associated factor (TRAF) molecules, which are necessary for pro-inflammatory cytokine signalling. We report two novel genes, Cezanne (cellular zinc finger anti-NF-kappa B) and TRABID (TRAF-binding domain), with sequence similarity to A20. Co-immunoprecipitation studies indicated that TRAF6 was able to interact with both Cezanne and TRABID. In contrast, reporter gene experiments revealed a specific ability of Cezanne to down-regulate NF-kappa B. It is likely, therefore, that Cezanne participates in the regulation of inflammatory processes.
