---
pmid: '8319908'
title: CLB5 and CLB6, a new pair of B cyclins involved in DNA replication in Saccharomyces
  cerevisiae.
authors:
- Schwob E
- Nasmyth K
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1101/gad.7.7a.1160
---

# CLB5 and CLB6, a new pair of B cyclins involved in DNA replication in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Schwob E, Nasmyth K
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.7.7a.1160](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.7.7a.1160)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1993 Jul;7(7A):1160-75. doi: 10.1101/gad.7.7a.1160.

CLB5 and CLB6, a new pair of B cyclins involved in DNA replication in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Schwob E(1), Nasmyth K.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria.

The functions of the Cdc28 protein kinase in DNA replication and mitosis in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae are thought to be determined by the type of cyclin 
subunit with which it is associated. G1-specific cyclins encoded by CLN1, CLN2, 
and CLN3 are required for entry into the cell cycle (Start) and thereby for S 
phase, whereas G2-specific B-type cyclins encoded by CLB1, CLB2, CLB3, and CLB4 
are required for mitosis. We describe a new family of B-type cyclin genes, CLB5 
and CLB6, whose transcripts appear in late G1 along with those of CLN1, CLN2, 
and many genes required for DNA replication. Deletion of CLB6 has little or no 
effect, but deletion of CLB5 greatly extends S phase, and deleting both genes 
prevents the timely initiation of DNA replication. Transcription of CLB5 and 
CLB6 is normally dependent on Cln activity, but ectopic CLB5 expression allows 
cells to proliferate in the absence of Cln cyclins. Thus, the kinase activity 
associated with Clb5/6 and not with Cln cyclins may be responsible for S-phase 
entry. Clb5 also has a function, along with Clb3 and Clb4, in the formation of 
mitotic spindles. Our observation that CLB5 is involved in the initiation of 
both S phase and mitosis suggests that a single primordial B-type cyclin might 
have been sufficient for regulating the cell cycle of the common ancestor of 
many, if not all, eukaryotes.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.7.7a.1160
PMID: 8319908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
