---
pmid: '19204372'
title: Both the RGS domain and the six C-terminal amino acids of mouse Axin are required
  for normal embryogenesis.
authors:
- Chia IV
- Kim MJ
- Itoh K
- Sokol SY
- Costantini F
journal: Genetics
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC2666505
doi: 10.1534/genetics.109.101055
---

# Both the RGS domain and the six C-terminal amino acids of mouse Axin are required for normal embryogenesis.
**Authors:** Chia IV, Kim MJ, Itoh K, Sokol SY, Costantini F
**Journal:** Genetics (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1534/genetics.109.101055](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.109.101055)
**PMC:** [PMC2666505](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2666505/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2009 Apr;181(4):1359-68. doi: 10.1534/genetics.109.101055. Epub 2009
 Feb 9.

Both the RGS domain and the six C-terminal amino acids of mouse Axin are 
required for normal embryogenesis.

Chia IV(1), Kim MJ, Itoh K, Sokol SY, Costantini F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Medical Center, 
New York, NY 10032, USA.

Axin is a negative regulator of canonical Wnt signaling, which promotes the 
degradation of beta-catenin, the major effector in this signaling cascade. While 
many protein-binding domains of Axin have been identified, their significance 
has not been evaluated in vivo. Here, we report the generation and analysis of 
mice carrying modified Axin alleles in which either the RGS domain or the six 
C-terminal amino acids (C6 motif) were deleted. The RGS domain is required for 
APC-binding, while the C6 motif has been implicated in the activation of c-Jun 
N-terminal kinase, but is not required for the effects of Axin on the 
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway, in vitro. Both mutant Axin alleles caused recessive 
embryonic lethality at E9.5-E10.5, with defects indistinguishable from those 
caused by a null allele. As Axin-DeltaRGS protein was produced at normal levels, 
its inability to support embryogenesis confirms the importance of interactions 
between Axin and APC. In contrast, Axin-DeltaC6 protein was expressed at only 
25-30% of the normal level, which may account for the recessive lethality of 
this allele. Furthermore, many Axin(DeltaC6/DeltaC6) embryos that were 
heterozygous for a beta-catenin null mutation survived to term, demonstrating 
that early lethality was due to failure to negatively regulate beta-catenin.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.109.101055
PMCID: PMC2666505
PMID: 19204372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Axin is a negative regulator of canonical Wnt signaling, which promotes the degradation of β-catenin, the major effector in this signaling cascade. While many protein-binding domains of Axin have been identified, their significance has not been evaluated in vivo . Here, we report the generation and analysis of mice carrying modified Axin alleles in which either the RGS domain or the six C-terminal amino acids (C6 motif) were deleted. The RGS domain is required for APC-binding, while the C6 motif has been implicated in the activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase, but is not required for the effects of Axin on the Wnt/β-catenin pathway, in vitro . Both mutant Axin alleles caused recessive embryonic lethality at E9.5–E10.5, with defects indistinguishable from those caused by a null allele. As Axin-ΔRGS protein was produced at normal levels, its inability to support embryogenesis confirms the importance of interactions between Axin and APC. In contrast, Axin-ΔC6 protein was expressed at only 25–30% of the normal level, which may account for the recessive lethality of this allele. Furthermore, many Axin Δ C6/ Δ C6 embryos that were heterozygous for a β-catenin null mutation survived to term, demonstrating that early lethality was due to failure to negatively regulate β-catenin.

Loss of the Axin C6 motif results in recessive embryonic lethality:

Axin Δ C6/+ heterozygotes appeared normal, fertile, and transmitted the Axin Δ C6 allele at a frequency of ∼50%. However, Axin Δ C6/ Δ C6 homozygous mice could not be generated. Of 22 F 2 pups obtained at weaning from Axin Δ C6/+ intercrosses, 12 were Axin Δ C6/+ while the remaining 10 were wild type. Since we had not noted any postnatal death, we concluded that Axin Δ C6 was likely to be prenatal recessive lethal allele.

Axin Δ C6/ Δ C6 embryos were examined at E9.5 to -10.5, stages at which the Axin Tg1/Tg1 null homozygotes were severely abnormal but not yet resorbed ( P erry et al. 1995 ; Z eng et al. 1997 ). There were 32/137 mutant homozygotes, consistent with the expected 25% frequency, and all were severely abnormal ( Figure 2, H–K ). In addition to being much smaller than wild-type littermates, they were indistinguishable from Axin Tg1/Tg1 (or Axin Δ RGS/ Δ RGS ) embryos, displaying the same characteristic features, including reduced size (32/32), open and shortened head folds (14/32), cardia bifida (14/32), enlarged pericardium (13/32), kinky neural tube (10/32), and duplicated body axes (1/32) ( P erry et al. 1995 ; Z eng et al. 1997 ). Therefore, we conclude that Axin Δ C6 also acts essentially as a null allele.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we used targeted gene replacement in mice to investigate the in vivo significance of two conserved domains of Axin, the APC-binding (RGS) domain and the terminal C6 motif (KVEKVD). While this strategy is more laborious than many other experimental approaches, it has the advantage that it preserves the normal pattern and level of transcription of the endogenous locus, while also knocking out the endogenous gene. Therefore, mutant forms of the protein are assayed for their functions in vivo , and in the absence of the endogenous gene product. We found that the RGS domain and the C6 motif are both required for the normal activity of Axin, as homozygotes for either deletion allele displayed embryonic lethality and abnormalities indistinguishable from those caused by a null allele. However, the mechanisms by which they disrupt the function of Axin appear to be different.

The RGS domain is required for binding to APC in vitro , but there were conflicting data regarding its importance for the function of Axin in the canonical Wnt pathway ( Z eng et al. 1997 ; H art et al. 1998 ; I keda et al. 1998 ). Our finding that Axin Δ RGS/ Δ RGS mutants resemble null Axin Tg1/Tg1 embryos at E9.5 confirms that the RGS domain is required for the functions of Axin in vivo , presumably because it is needed to interact with APC (although other potential functions of the RGS domain cannot be excluded). Although Axin lacking its RGS domain acts as a dominant-negative in frog embryo and cell transfection assays ( Z eng et al. 1997 ; F agotto et al. 1999 ), we did not observe any abnormalities in heterozygous Axin Δ RGS/+ animals. This may be because the amount of the mutant protein in heterozygous mice is lower than it is in typical overexpression experiments, and it is therefore insufficient to inhibit the endogenous wild-type Axin.

Our interest in the C6 motif of Axin stemmed from a report that overexpression of Axin in HEK293 cells could activate the JNK MAP kinase through the upstream kinases MEKK1 and MEKK4 ( Z hang et al. 1999 , 2000 , 2001 ; R ui et al. 2002 ). Deletion analysis revealed that the two domains required for JNK activation are different from those needed for Wnt regulation. They included a region needed for Axin homodimerization (between residues 507 and 832) as well as the C6 motif. Thus, deletion of only C6 severely reduced the ability of Axin to activate JNK, but not to regulate β-catenin levels, in transfected cells. It was also shown that C6 is a major site for SUMOylation of Axin ( R ui et al. 2002 ), a modification whose significance remains unclear, although we have obtained evidence that SUMOylation of the C6 motif may protect Axin from ubiquitination ( K im et al. 2008 ). We found that the Axin Δ C6 allele was also recessive lethal, and that Axin Δ C6/ Δ C6 embryos died at the same stage as null Axin Tg1/Tg1 mutants, with the same spectrum of defects. However, this embryonic lethality appears most likely to be due to a low level of expression of the Axin-ΔC6 protein, rather than to any inherent functional defect in the mutant protein, for the following reasons.

First, in heterozygous embryos, where the level of Axin-ΔC6 protein should have been equivalent to wild-type Axin, it was present at three- to fourfold lower levels, while in homozygous mutant embryos it was undetectable (probably <10% of wild-type levels). Subsequent biochemical experiments have shown that the removal of the C6 motif results in increased ubiquitination and decreased stability of Axin-ΔC6, apparently due to the loss of the SUMOylation sites within the C6 motif ( K im et al. 2008 ).

Second, Axin-ΔC6 showed a normal capacity to attenuate a Lef1-luciferase reporter in transfected cells, and a somewhat enhanced ability to ventralize frog embryos when injected dorsally at the four-cell stage. Both of these assays may be relatively insensitive to the stability of the protein; however, they have been used extensively to define functional domains of Axin, and other proteins involved in canonical Wnt signaling, so any inherent defect in the ability of Axin-ΔC6 to regulate this pathway probably would have been apparent in these experiments.

Third, the embryonic lethality of Axin Δ C6/ Δ C6 mutants could be rescued by eliminating one allele of the β-catenin gene Ctnnb1 , and these rescued mutants developed to term with craniofacial defects, but no other gross abnormalities. This provided genetic proof that the early lethality and multiple abnormalities at E9.5–E10.5 are due to failure of the Axin Δ C6 allele to negatively regulate the level of β-catenin. Further evidence that the embryonic lethality of both Axin Tg1/Tg1 and Axin Δ C6/ Δ C6 mutants can be explained by failure to regulate the Wnt/β-catenin pathway comes from the observation that overexpression of cWnt8c in the mouse embryo resulted in a very similar embryonic lethal phenotype ( P öpperl et al. 1997 ). Since the Axin-ΔC6 protein is capable of regulating β-catenin levels when overexpressed but fails to do so in homozygous mutant embryos, the simplest explanation is its low level of expression.

Although the embryonic lethality of Axin Δ C6/ Δ C6 mutants was rescued by reducing the level of β-catenin, the rescued animals displayed severe craniofacial abnormalities. These residual defects in craniofacial development could be due either to incomplete rescue of the excessive β-catenin signaling or to a failure of A xin ΔC6 to perform a different function.

According to the first model, strongly elevated levels of β-catenin cause the embryonic lethal phenotype, while mildly elevated levels cause only craniofacial defects. Evidence consistent with this model comes from analysis of compound mutant mice between Axin and Axin2 . While homozygous Axin2 −/− mice develop normally except for skull malformations (caused by premature fusion of cranial sutures) ( Y u et al. 2005 ), Axin2 −/− embryos that were also missing one Axin allele were born with severe craniofacial abnormalities reminiscent of those seen in the rescued Axin Δ C6/ Δ C6 ; Ctnnb1 +/− mutants. Furthermore, the defects in Axin2−/−; Axin+/− mice could be fully rescued by deletion of one allele of Ctnnb1 (B. J erchow and W. B irchmeier , personal communication). Therefore, the evidence suggests that there may be a continuum of defects, ranging from embryonic lethality, to survival with craniofacial defects, to normal development, depending on the level of depletion of Axin and/or Axin2 and the consequent deregulation of β-catenin. This might be directly tested in the future by manipulating the levels of β-catenin in developing embryos. The ability of the Axin Δ C6/ Δ C6 mutants to be rescued by reduction in β-catenin gene dosage was sensitive to genetic background (data not shown), suggesting that other genes that vary between inbred strains of mice may also affect the level of β-catenin signaling.

According to the second model, Axin might be important not only to negatively regulate β-catenin, but also, later in development, to perform another function. One such function might be related to its capacity to stimulate the JNK pathway via the C6 motif ( R ui et al. 2002 ). If this were true, one might expect knockout of JNK genes to result in defects similar to those caused by A xin ΔC6 . Of the three JNK genes, Mapk8 (JNK1) and Mapk9 (JNK2) are ubiquitously expressed while Mapk10 (JNK3) is expressed in the CNS ( K uan et al. 1999 ; W eston and D avis 2002 ). Single knockouts of Mapk8 , Mapk9 , or Mapk10 cause only minor defects, none affecting craniofacial development ( Y ang et al. 1997 ; K uan et al. 1999 ; S abapathy et al. 1999 ; W eston and D avis 2002 ). Simultaneous loss of Mapk8 and J Mapk9 NK2 results in exencephaly and neural tube closure defects due to reduced apoptosis in the hindbrain ( K uan et al. 1999 ), while Mapk8 / Mapk10 and Mapk9 / Map10 double mutants are viable ( Y ang et al. 1997 ; K uan et al. 1999 ). However, the triple mutant has not been reported, so a role in craniofacial development has not been fully excluded.

It has recently been shown that JNK signaling in early Xenopus embryos can antagonize the canonical Wnt pathway, apparently by regulating the nucleocytoplasmic transport of β-catenin ( L iao et al. 2006 ). Therefore, any potential effects of Axin on JNK signaling may not be completely separable from its effects on β-catenin. Furthermore, Axin can interact with proteins involved in several signaling pathways ( e.g. , TGF-β), so we cannot exclude the additional possibility that the incomplete rescue of Axin Δ C6/ Δ C6 by the β-catenin heterozygous deletion reflects a role for Axin in some other pathway. Regardless of the mechanism, the Axin- Δ C6 mutation establishes that the C6 motif has an essential function in vivo . This may be related to its ability to protect Axin from ubiquitination and instability ( K im et al. 2008 ).
