---
pmid: '16688214'
title: Cdk1 regulates centrosome separation by restraining proteolysis of microtubule-associated
  proteins.
authors:
- Crasta K
- Huang P
- Morgan G
- Winey M
- Surana U
journal: EMBO J
year: '2006'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC1478175
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601136
---

# Cdk1 regulates centrosome separation by restraining proteolysis of microtubule-associated proteins.
**Authors:** Crasta K, Huang P, Morgan G, Winey M, Surana U
**Journal:** EMBO J (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601136](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601136)
**PMC:** [PMC1478175](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1478175/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2006 Jun 7;25(11):2551-63. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601136. Epub 2006
May  11.

Cdk1 regulates centrosome separation by restraining proteolysis of 
microtubule-associated proteins.

Crasta K(1), Huang P, Morgan G, Winey M, Surana U.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Proteos, Singapore.

In yeast, separation of duplicated spindle pole bodies (SPBs) (centrosomes in 
higher eukaryotes) is an indispensable step in the assembly of mitotic spindle 
and is triggered by severing of the bridge that connects the sister SPBs. This 
process requires Cdk1 (Cdc28) activation by Tyrosine 19 dephosphorylation. We 
show that cells that fail to activate Cdk1 are devoid of spindles due to 
persistently active APCCdh1, which targets microtubule-associated proteins Cin8, 
Kip1 and Ase1 for degradation. Tyrosine 19 dephosphorylation of Cdk1 is 
necessary to specifically prevent proteolysis of these proteins. Interestingly, 
SPB separation is dependent on the microtubule-bundling activity of Cin8 but not 
on its motor function. Since ectopic expression of proteolysis-resistant Cin8, 
Kip1 or Ase1 is sufficient for SPB separation even in the absence of Cdc28-Clb 
activity, we suggest that stabilization of these mechanical force-generating 
proteins is the predominant role of Cdc28-Clb in centrosome separation.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601136
PMCID: PMC1478175
PMID: 16688214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In yeast, separation of duplicated spindle pole bodies (SPBs) (centrosomes in higher eukaryotes) is an indispensable step in the assembly of mitotic spindle and is triggered by severing of the bridge that connects the sister SPBs. This process requires Cdk1 (Cdc28) activation by Tyrosine 19 dephosphorylation. We show that cells that fail to activate Cdk1 are devoid of spindles due to persistently active APC Cdh1 , which targets microtubule-associated proteins Cin8, Kip1 and Ase1 for degradation. Tyrosine 19 dephosphorylation of Cdk1 is necessary to specifically prevent proteolysis of these proteins. Interestingly, SPB separation is dependent on the microtubule-bundling activity of Cin8 but not on its motor function. Since ectopic expression of proteolysis-resistant Cin8, Kip1 or Ase1 is sufficient for SPB separation even in the absence of Cdc28-Clb activity, we suggest that stabilization of these mechanical force-generating proteins is the predominant role of Cdc28-Clb in centrosome separation.

Introduction

Assembly of a bipolar spindle is essential for accurate segregation of replicated chromosomes to daughter cells during cell division. Both temporal and spatial regulation is critical for construction of a functional bipolar spindle since failure to do so can lead to genomic instability and aneuploidy, often associated with cancers. In budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae , spindle pole bodies (SPBs, the centrosome equivalent) nucleate microtubules and are central to the establishment of spindle bipolarity ( Byers and Goetsch, 1975 ).

The SPB, a multitiered cylindrical organelle embedded in the nuclear envelope throughout the cell cycle, comprises three main layers: outer, central and inner plaques ( Jaspersen and Winey, 2004 ). While the outer plaque faces the cytoplasm and nucleates cytoplasmic microtubules, the inner plaque is oriented towards the nucleoplasm and extends nuclear microtubules. The central plaque spans the nuclear membrane and contains proteins such as Spc42 and Spc29. It also bears an electron-dense structure known as the half-bridge that plays an important role in spindle development. Cdc31 (centrin homologue), Kar1, Mps3 and Sfi1 are specifically localized to this structure ( Jaspersen and Winey, 2004 ). While these proteins are necessary for half-bridge integrity, it is unclear how this structure itself is assembled. The bridge is also the site of new SPB assembly and eventually tethers the duplicated SPBs.

Spindle assembly is a cell cycle-regulated, multistep process. Yeast cells inherit one SPB, bearing a half-bridge, from their mothers. During G1 (prior to START), the tip of the cytoplasmic side of half-bridge acquires the SPB precursor known as ‘satellite' ( Byers and Goetsch, 1975 ). As cells traverse START, the satellite expands into a duplication plaque, similar in structure to the cytoplasmic side of a mature SPB. This requires self-assembly of Spc42 in which Spc42 dimers trimerize to construct the plaque ( Bullitt et al , 1997 ). About the same time, the half-bridge elongates under the duplication plaque and forms a complete bridge by fusion of its cytoplasmic and nuclear fronts. The partial retraction of the half-bridge allows insertion of duplication plaque into the nuclear membrane and construction of nucleoplasmic-side of SPB ( Adams and Kilmartin, 1999 ). Eventually, old and the newly duplicated SPBs lie side-by-side, linked by a complete bridge ( O'Toole et al , 1999 ). Some time in late S phase, the bridge is severed and the SPBs move away from each other, finally facing each other, separated by interdigitating parallel microtubules ( Winey et al , 1995 ). This configuration is what is generally referred to as a short spindle.

Severing of the inter-SPB bridge is one of the critical steps in mitotic spindle assembly; however, this process has remained largely obscure. Cells that fail to sever the bridge are unable to assemble a spindle and arrest in mitosis with side-by-side SPBs. In budding yeast, the following conditions give rise to this phenotype: (i) cells lacking kinesin motor proteins Cin8 and Kip1 ( Hoyt et al , 1992 ; Roof et al , 1992 ); (ii) cells with combined deficiency of B-type cyclins, Clb3, Clb4 and Clb5 ( Yeong et al , 2001 ); (iii) cells with combined deficiency of Clb1, Clb2, Clb3 and Clb4 ( Fitch et al , 1992 ); (iv) cells unable to activate Cdc28 by tyrosine 19 dephosphorylation (Y19) catalyzed by Mih1 (homolog of Cdc25 phosphatase) and (v) cells expressing cdc28Y19E or overexpressing Wee1 homologue Swe1 ( Lim et al , 1996 ). These observations suggest that SPB separation requires microtubule-associated kinesin motors Cin8 and Kip1, and Cdc28/Clb kinase. Involvement of motor proteins and kinases in centrosome separation has also been reported in other systems. Cdc2-mediated phosphorylation of kinesin motor human Eg5 allows it to localize to centrosomes, where it participates in their separation ( Blangy et al , 1995 ; Sawin and Mitchison, 1995 ). In both Drosophila and Xenopus , loss of aurora-A kinase activity leads to failure in centrosome separation ( Glover et al , 1995 ; Giet et al , 1999 ). Similarly, inhibition of polo kinase in Drosophila and human cells results in an inability to separate centrosomes ( Sunkel and Glover, 1988 ; Lane and Nigg, 1996 ).

Although the role of Cin8 and Kip1 in SPB separation in yeast can be envisioned as force generation, the exact mechanics by which separation is achieved remain elusive. The function of Cdc28/Clb kinases in SPB separation is equally intriguing. It is also unclear whether Clb kinase complexes contribute to SPB separation via a process distinct from the one catalyzed by motor proteins. One possibility is the involvement of Clb kinases in severing of the bridge by a yet unknown mechanism, followed by crosslinking and sliding of interdigitated microtubules by motor proteins, pushing the newly disconnected SPBs further apart ( Hoyt et al , 1992 ; Jaspersen and Winey, 2004 ). Alternatively, Clb kinases may help to activate motor proteins that in turn generate sufficient mechanical ‘strength' to force duplicated SPBs apart.

Here we examined the regulatory role of Cdc28/Clb kinase in SPB separation. We find that microtubule-associated proteins Cin8, Kip1 and Ase1 are highly unstable in cells that fail to dephosphorylate Cdc28 on Tyr19 ( cdc28Y19E mutant), resulting in failure to separate SPBs. This instability is due to persistently active Cdh1 in these cells. Our results imply that Tyr19 dephosphorylation of Cdc28 is required to inactivate APC Cdh1 specifically for stabilization of microtubule-associated proteins. Moreover, Cdh1 inactivated by active Cdc28 (Tyr19 dephosphorylated) fails to enter nucleus, ensuring accumulation of these proteins. Strikingly, while the bundling activity of Cin8 is necessary for SPB separation, its motor activity is not. Collectively, our observations suggest that tyrosine dephosphorylation of Cdc28 acts as a ‘regulatory switch' that controls the assembly of mitotic spindle.

Discussion

In most organisms, the timing of mitotic spindle assembly correlates well with entry into mitosis and requires Cdc28/cdc2 mitotic kinase activity ( Blangy et al , 1995 ; Sawin and Mitchison, 1995 ). What role does mitotic kinase, and specifically its Y19-dephosphorylated form, serve in SPB separation? In this study, we have shown that cdc28Y19E (mimicking Cdc28 constitutively phosphorylated on Y19) and cdc28-as1 cells are unable to accumulate the microtubule-binding proteins Cin8, Kip1 and Ase1 ( Figure 2 ). The instability of these proteins is dependent on Cdh1 since deletion of CDH1 allows accumulation of these proteins and assembly of a short spindle in these mutants ( Figure 4 ). That Cin8 is ubiquitylated to a significant extent in cdc28Y19E but to a much lesser extent in cdc28-1N and cdc23-1 strains (with spindle) ( Figure 5B ) and spindles form somewhat-prematurely in cdh1 Δ cells ( Figure 4D ) are consistent with this notion. Thus, our results strongly suggest that dephosphorylation of Cdc28 at Y19 is important for restraining APC Cdh1 to allow stabilization of microtubule-associated proteins and hence spindle biogenesis.

This notion is consistent with the correlation between Cdc28 dephosphorylation at Tyr 19, phosphorylation of Cdh1 and stabilization of microtubule-associated proteins during progression through normal cell cycle ( Figure 7 ). If this is true then how do yeast cells, arrested in early S phase by hydroxyurea (HU) treatment, assemble a short spindle when Cdc28 is phosphorylated on Tyr 19? It has been suggested previously that only a proportion of Cdc28 may be phosphorylated on Tyr 19 in HU-arrested cells ( Krishnan and Surana, 2005 ); hence, the unphosphorylated fraction of Cdc28 is perhaps responsible for increased stability of microtubule-associated proteins and, in turn, spindle formation. This idea is consistent with the observation that HU-treated cdc28Y19E cells (mimicking fully phosphorylated Cdc28 at Tyr 19) are unable to assemble a spindle ( Lim et al , 1996 ).

Cdh1 has been implicated in targeting both Clb2 and Cin8 for proteolysis ( Schwab et al , 1997 ; Hildebrandt and Hoyt, 2001 ). Yet, cdc28Y19E cells possess substantial amounts of Clb2 ( Lim et al , 1996 ) but not of Cin8, Ase1 and Kip1 ( Figure 1 ). One possibility is that in these cells Cdh1 is inactivated only partially by Cdc28Y19E form of Clb kinase such that it cannot target Clb2 for degradation, but continues to cause destruction of microtubule-associated proteins such as Cin8. This is reflected in a relatively low abundance of phosphorylated forms of Cdh1 in cdc28Y19E and high abundance in cdc28-1N and cdc28Y19F cells (with spindles) ( Figure 5 ). As Cdh1 contains 11 potential Cdk1 phosphorylation sites, these results raise the possibility that while phosphorylation of some sites inhibit Cdh1 from targeting Clb2, phosphorylation of some other sites may prevent Cdh1 specifically from targeting microtubule-associated proteins. Our attempts to mutate the phosphorylation sites in various combinations have not revealed such target-specific phosphorylation sites ( Figure 6 ). Hence, it is possible that this specificity is quantitative in nature such that ‘partial phosphorylation' of Cdh1 prevents it from targeting Clb2 while ‘complete phosphorylation' inhibits it from targeting both Clb2 and microtubule-associated proteins. While this issue awaits resolution, our results lead to two main conclusions: (1) dephosphorylation of Cdc28 at Tyr19 is essential for stabilization of Cin8, Kip1 and Ase1; (2) that Cin8 overexpression leads to spindle formation in clb3 Δ clb4 Δ clb5 Δ cells even though they are almost completely devoid of Cdc28-Clb kinase activity implies that stabilization of microtubule-associated proteins via Cdh1 inactivation may be the predominant role of Cdc28-Clb kinase in SPB separation.

It is clear that Cdk1's predominant role in SPB separation is to stabilize microtubule-binding proteins such as Cin8, Kip1 and Ase1. Once stabilized, how do these proteins accomplish the task of breaking the bridge that links the duplicated SPBs? In mammalian cells, microtubule-dependent motors are required for centrosome separation ( Blangy et al , 1995 ; Lane and Nigg, 1996 ). However, it is not known how these motors induce centrosome separation. We find that SPB separation can be induced by a mutant version of Cin8 that lacks motor activity but not by the one deficient in microtubule-binding or -bundling activity ( Figure 3C ). SPB separation is accompanied by the conversion of interdigitating microtubules emanating from ‘side-by-side' SPB into a parallel array, forming a short spindle. It is possible that bundling activity of proteins such as Cin8 and Ase1 generates mechanical force of sufficient strength that catalyzes this conversion and, in the process, breaks the inter-SPB bridge. However, involvement of processes other than mechanical ones may also be important. While our results suggest that bundling activity is sufficient for SPB separation, compensation by other microtubule-associated motors cannot be unequivocally discounted.

Our findings are consistent with a regulatory scheme for SPB separation ( Figure 7B ) in which Cdc28-Clb kinase mediates stabilization of microtubule-associated proteins (Cin8, Kip1 and Ase1) by inactivating Cdh1 via phosphorylation. While the mitotically inactive form of Cdc28 (phosphorylated on Tyr19) can inactivate Cdh1 resulting in Clb2 stability, only the mitotically active form of Cdc28 (with dephosphorylated Tyr19) is able to prevent Cdh1-mediated degradation of microtubule-associated proteins. Hence, one of the essential roles of Tyr15/19 dephosphorylation (the evolutionarily conserved way of activating mitotic kinase Cdc2/Cdc28) is to protect microtubule-binding proteins from Cdh1-mediated proteolysis during S phase, allowing SPB separation and spindle formation. Interestingly, in human cells, constitutive activation of APC Cdh1 also results in failure to separate centrosomes ( Sørensen et al , 2000 ). We suspect that requirement of Cdc2/Cdc28 activation by Tyr15/Tyr19 dephosphorylation to prevent Cdh1-mediated proteolysis of microtubule-associated proteins and centrosome separation is not restricted only to budding yeast but may be more widespread among other eukaryotes.
