---
pmid: '11884608'
title: p53-dependent S-phase damage checkpoint and pronuclear cross talk in mouse
  zygotes with X-irradiated sperm.
authors:
- Shimura T
- Inoue M
- Taga M
- Shiraishi K
- Uematsu N
- Takei N
- Yuan ZM
- Shinohara T
- Niwa O
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC133678
doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.7.2220-2228.2002
---

# p53-dependent S-phase damage checkpoint and pronuclear cross talk in mouse zygotes with X-irradiated sperm.
**Authors:** Shimura T, Inoue M, Taga M, Shiraishi K, Uematsu N, Takei N, Yuan ZM, Shinohara T, Niwa O
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.22.7.2220-2228.2002](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.22.7.2220-2228.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC133678](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC133678/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Apr;22(7):2220-8. doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.7.2220-2228.2002.

p53-dependent S-phase damage checkpoint and pronuclear cross talk in mouse 
zygotes with X-irradiated sperm.

Shimura T(1), Inoue M, Taga M, Shiraishi K, Uematsu N, Takei N, Yuan ZM, 
Shinohara T, Niwa O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Late Effect Studies, Radiation Biology Center, Kyoto 
University, Yoshida Konoe, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

One difficulty in analyzing the damage response is that the effect of damage 
itself and that of cellular response are hard to distinguish in irradiated 
cells. In mouse zygotes, damage can be introduced by irradiated sperm, while 
damage response can be studied in the unirradiated maternal pronucleus. We have 
analyzed the p53-dependent damage responses in irradiated-sperm mouse zygotes 
and found that a p53-responsive reporter was efficiently activated in the female 
pronucleus. [(3)H]thymidine labeling experiments indicated that irradiated-sperm 
zygotes were devoid of G(1)/S arrest, but pronuclear DNA synthesis was 
suppressed equally in male and female pronuclei. p53(-/-) zygotes lacked this 
suppression, which was corrected by microinjection of glutathione 
S-transferase-p53 fusion protein. In contrast, p21(-/-) zygotes exhibited the 
same level of suppression upon fertilization by irradiated sperm. About a half 
of the 6-Gy-irradiated-sperm zygotes managed to synthesize a full DNA content by 
prolonging S phase, while the other half failed to do so. Regardless of the DNA 
content, all the zygotes cleaved to become two-cell-stage embryos. These results 
revealed the presence of p53-dependent pronuclear cross talk and a novel 
function of p53 in the S-phase DNA damage checkpoint of mouse zygotes.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.22.7.2220-2228.2002
PMCID: PMC133678
PMID: 11884608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

One difficulty in analyzing the damage response is that the effect of damage itself and that of cellular response are hard to distinguish in irradiated cells. In mouse zygotes, damage can be introduced by irradiated sperm, while damage response can be studied in the unirradiated maternal pronucleus. We have analyzed the p53-dependent damage responses in irradiated-sperm mouse zygotes and found that a p53-responsive reporter was efficiently activated in the female pronucleus. [ 3 H]thymidine labeling experiments indicated that irradiated-sperm zygotes were devoid of G 1 /S arrest, but pronuclear DNA synthesis was suppressed equally in male and female pronuclei. p53 −/− zygotes lacked this suppression, which was corrected by microinjection of glutathione S -transferase-p53 fusion protein. In contrast, p21 −/− zygotes exhibited the same level of suppression upon fertilization by irradiated sperm. About a half of the 6-Gy-irradiated-sperm zygotes managed to synthesize a full DNA content by prolonging S phase, while the other half failed to do so. Regardless of the DNA content, all the zygotes cleaved to become two-cell-stage embryos. These results revealed the presence of p53-dependent pronuclear cross talk and a novel function of p53 in the S-phase DNA damage checkpoint of mouse zygotes.
