---
pmid: '22010141'
title: The membrane topological analysis of 3β-hydroxysteroid-Delta24 reductase (DHCR24)
  on endoplasmic reticulum.
authors:
- Lu X
- Li Y
- Liu J
- Cao X
- Wang X
- Wang D
- Seo H
- Gao B
journal: J Mol Endocrinol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1530/JME-11-0132
---

# The membrane topological analysis of 3β-hydroxysteroid-Delta24 reductase (DHCR24) on endoplasmic reticulum.
**Authors:** Lu X, Li Y, Liu J, Cao X, Wang X, Wang D, Seo H, Gao B
**Journal:** J Mol Endocrinol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1530/JME-11-0132](https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-11-0132)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Jan 25;48(1):1-9. doi: 10.1530/JME-11-0132. Print 2012 
Feb.

The membrane topological analysis of 3β-hydroxysteroid-Delta24 reductase 
(DHCR24) on endoplasmic reticulum.

Lu X(1), Li Y, Liu J, Cao X, Wang X, Wang D, Seo H, Gao B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, School of Life Science, Liaoning 
University, Huang-Gu-Qu, Chong-Shang-Zhong-Lu No. 66, Shenyang 110036, China.

DHCR24 encodes 3β-hydroxysteroid-Δ24 reductase, catalyzing the conversion of 
desmosterol to cholesterol. Our previous study demonstrated that DHCR24 exerts 
an anti-apoptotic function as a reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenger, for 
which it needs its FAD-binding domain. The membrane topology of DHCR24 on 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the functional significance of its FAD-binding 
domain are not completely understood. Based on the structure predicted by 
bioinformatics, we studied the membrane topology of DHCR24 in murine 
neuroblastoma cells (N2A), using the fluorescent protease protection (FPP) 
technique. We showed that full-length DHCR24 is localized to the membrane of ER, 
whereas the predicted transmembrane (TM) domain-deleted DHCR24 mutation is 
localized to the cytoplasm. The change of DHCR24 localization suggests that the 
N-terminal TM domain is essential for the ER membrane targeting of DHCR24. The 
FPP assay demonstrated the membrane topology of DHCR24 with an N-terminal 
luminal/C-terminal cytoplasmic orientation. Measurement of intracellular ROS 
using H(2)DCFDA revealed that the ROS levels of cells infected by plasmids 
driving expression of full-length DHCR24 or the TM domain-deleted DHCR24 
mutation after H(2)O(2) exposure were lower than those of control cells, 
suggesting that the ER membrane targeting of DHCR24 is not required for its 
enzymatic ROS scavenging activity. Confocal fluorescence microscopy revealed 
that the DHCR24-overexpressed cells were protected from apoptosis in response to 
oxidative stress, which was accompanied by a decrease in DHCR24 content on the 
ER and activation of caspase-3, suggesting that the anti-apoptotic function of 
DHCR24 is associated with its cleavage by caspase.

DOI: 10.1530/JME-11-0132
PMID: 22010141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
