---
pmid: '15339649'
title: Analysis of Dscam diversity in regulating axon guidance in Drosophila mushroom
  bodies.
authors:
- Zhan XL
- Clemens JC
- Neves G
- Hattori D
- Flanagan JJ
- Hummel T
- Vasconcelos ML
- Chess A
- Zipursky SL
journal: Neuron
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.07.020
---

# Analysis of Dscam diversity in regulating axon guidance in Drosophila mushroom bodies.
**Authors:** Zhan XL, Clemens JC, Neves G, Hattori D, Flanagan JJ, Hummel T, Vasconcelos ML, Chess A, Zipursky SL
**Journal:** Neuron (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2004.07.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2004.07.020)

## Abstract

1. Neuron. 2004 Sep 2;43(5):673-86. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.07.020.

Analysis of Dscam diversity in regulating axon guidance in Drosophila mushroom 
bodies.

Zhan XL(1), Clemens JC, Neves G, Hattori D, Flanagan JJ, Hummel T, Vasconcelos 
ML, Chess A, Zipursky SL.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biological Chemistry, The 
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, 90095, 
USA.

Dscam is an immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily member that regulates axon guidance 
and targeting in Drosophila. Alternative splicing potentially generates 38,016 
isoforms differing in their extracellular Ig and transmembrane domains. We 
demonstrate that Dscam mediates the sorting of axons in the developing mushroom 
body (MB). This correlates with the precise spatiotemporal pattern of Dscam 
protein expression. We demonstrate that MB neurons express different arrays of 
Dscam isoforms and that single MB neurons express multiple isoforms. Two 
different Dscam isoforms differing in their extracellular domains introduced as 
transgenes into single mutant cells partially rescued the mutant phenotype. 
Expression of one isoform of Dscam in a cohort of MB neurons induced dominant 
phenotypes, while expression of a single isoform in a single cell did not. We 
propose that different extracellular domains of Dscam share a common function 
and that differences in isoforms expressed on the surface of neighboring axons 
influence interactions between them.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.07.020
PMID: 15339649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
