---
pmid: '17135271'
title: Site-specific Lys-63-linked tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor
  6 auto-ubiquitination is a critical determinant of I kappa B kinase activation.
authors:
- Lamothe B
- Besse A
- Campos AD
- Webster WK
- Wu H
- Darnay BG
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC3221607
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M609503200
---

# Site-specific Lys-63-linked tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 auto-ubiquitination is a critical determinant of I kappa B kinase activation.
**Authors:** Lamothe B, Besse A, Campos AD, Webster WK, Wu H, Darnay BG
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M609503200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M609503200)
**PMC:** [PMC3221607](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3221607/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Feb 9;282(6):4102-12. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M609503200. Epub 2006
 Nov 29.

Site-specific Lys-63-linked tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 
auto-ubiquitination is a critical determinant of I kappa B kinase activation.

Lamothe B(1), Besse A, Campos AD, Webster WK, Wu H, Darnay BG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas M D Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) is a key 
mediator in proximal signaling of the interleukin-1/Toll-like receptor and the 
TNF receptor superfamily. Analysis of TRAF6-deficient mice revealed a 
fundamental role of TRAF6 in osteoclastogenesis; however, the molecular 
mechanism underlying TRAF6 signaling in this biological process is not 
understood. Recent biochemical evidence has indicated that TRAF6 possesses 
ubiquitin ligase activity that controls the activation of IKK and NF-kappaB. 
Because these studies are primarily based on cell-free systems, the role of the 
ubiquitin ligase activity of TRAF6 and its auto-ubiquitination to initiate the 
NF-kappaB pathway in vivo remain elusive. Here we show that an intact RING 
domain of TRAF6 in conjunction with the E2 enzyme Ubc13/Uev1A is necessary for 
Lys-63-linked auto-ubiquitination of TRAF6 and for its ability to activate IKK 
and NF-kappaB. Furthermore, a RING mutant of TRAF6 abolishes its ability to 
induce receptor activator of NF-kappaB-independent osteoclast differentiation 
and nuclear accumulation of the transcription factor NFATc1. Notably, we map the 
auto-ubiquitination site of TRAF6 to a single Lys residue, which if mutated 
renders TRAF6 unable to activate transforming growth factor-beta-activated 
kinase 1 and IKK and to cause spontaneous osteoclast differentiation. 
Additionally, we provide biochemical and in vivo evidence that TRAF6 serves as 
an E3 to directly ubiquitinate NEMO. Reconstituting TRAF6-deficent cells with 
various TRAF6 mutants, we clearly demonstrate the requirement for the TRAF6 RING 
domain and site-specific auto-ubiquitination of TRAF6 to activate IKK in 
response to interleukin-1. These data establish a signaling cascade in which 
regulated site-specific Lys-63-linked TRAF6 auto-ubiquitination is the critical 
upstream mediator of IKK.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M609503200
PMCID: PMC3221607
PMID: 17135271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) is a key mediator in proximal signaling of the interleukin-1/Toll-like receptor and the TNF receptor superfamily. Analysis of TRAF6-deficient mice revealed a fundamental role of TRAF6 in osteoclastogenesis; however, the molecular mechanism underlying TRAF6 signaling in this biological process is not understood. Recent biochemical evidence has indicated that TRAF6 possesses ubiquitin ligase activity that controls the activation of IKK and NF-κB. Because these studies are primarily based on cell-free systems, the role of the ubiquitin ligase activity of TRAF6 and its auto-ubiquitination to initiate the NF-κB pathway in vivo remain elusive. Here we show that an intact RING domain of TRAF6 in conjunction with the E2 enzyme Ubc13/Uev1A is necessary for Lys-63-linked auto-ubiquitination of TRAF6 and for its ability to activate IKK and NF-κB. Furthermore, a RING mutant of TRAF6 abolishes its ability to induce receptor activator of NF-κB-independent osteoclast differentiation and nuclear accumulation of the transcription factor NFATc1. Notably, we map the auto-ubiquitination site of TRAF6 to a single Lys residue, which if mutated renders TRAF6 unable to activate transforming growth factor-β-activated kinase 1 and IKK and causes spontaneous osteoclast differentiation. Additionally, we provide biochemical and in vivo evidence that TRAF6 serves as an E3 to directly ubiquitinate NEMO. Reconstituting TRAF6-deficent cells with various TRAF6 mutants, we clearly demonstrate the requirement for the TRAF6 RING domain and site-specific auto-ubiquitination of TRAF6 to activate IKK in response to interleukin-1. These data establish a signaling cascade in which regulated site-specific Lys-63-linked TRAF6 auto-ubiquitination is the critical upstream mediator of IKK.

INTRODUCTION

The pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin-1 (IL-1) 3 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) elicit a critical function in the innate immune response. Following receptor activation, these cytokines induce a cascade of signaling events leading to the activation of transcription factors such as NF-κB and AP1 through upstream kinases including IκB kinase (IKK) and the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs; JNK, p38, and ERK). These events culminate in the expression and regulation of numerous pro-inflammatory genes ( 1 , 2 ).

TNF receptor associated factors (TRAFs) constitute a family of seven known adaptor proteins and most of them participate in activation of the transcription factor NF-κB and members of the MAPKs ( 3 – 5 ). Several TRAF proteins interact directly with the intracellular regions of various members of the TNF receptor family through a highly conserved motif at their C terminus termed the TRAF domain. In contrast, the N-terminal domain of the TRAFs is less well conserved, but consists of zinc finger motifs and in some TRAFs a RING (really interesting new gene) domain, which has been identified in a number of E3 ubiquitin ligases ( 6 ).

Recently, the N-terminal RING domain of TRAF6 has been included in a growing family of ubiquitin (Ub) ligases, also known as E3s ( 7 ). RING-type E3s contain a series of Cys and His residues distinctly separated to constitute a novel zinc-binding domain. The first hint that TRAF6 possesses Ub ligase activity came from biochemical reconstitution experiments that examined TRAF6-dependent activation of the IκB kinase (IKK) ( 8 , 9 ). IKK is a heterotrimeric complex composed of the kinase subunits IKKα and IKKβ and the regulatory subunit NEMO (also known as IKKγ). The dimeric Ub-conjugating enzyme Ubc13/Uev1A and the TAB2-TAK1 kinase complex were shown to be required for TRAF6-mediated IKK activation in vitro . In a cell free system, it appears that by facilitating the synthesis of unique Lys-63-linked poly-Ub chains, rather than the conventional Lys48 (K48)-linked poly-Ub chains that target proteins for degradation, TRAF6 activates TAK1 by an unknown mechanism. TAK1 then phosphorylates and activates IKK for NF-κB activation. TAK1 also phosphorylates MKK6 and MKK7, which in turn activate the JNK and p38 MAP kinase pathways, respectively. Recent studies suggest that the TAK1-binding protein TAB2 and its homologue TAB3 contain a highly conserved C-terminal zinc finger domain that binds preferentially to Lys-63-linked poly-Ub chains and is required for TAK1 activation ( 10 ).

Among all of the TRAFs, TRAF6 plays a critical role in osteoclastogenesis as revealed by the severe osteopetrosis phenotype in TRAF6-deficient mice ( 11 – 13 ). However, the molecular mechanism by which TRAF6 exerts this biological activity is not well understood. Indeed, the model of TRAF6-mediated kinase activation is exclusively based on in vitro reconstitution experiments. Nonetheless, it supports a novel Ub-dependent TRAF6 signaling pathway. However, there are many conceptual questions remaining about the potential downstream targets of the TRAF6 Ub ligase activity and the possible role of these ubiquitination events in the activation of signaling cascades. In this report, we performed a series of comprehensive studies to show that one of the most important targets of TRAF6 Ub ligase activity is TRAF6 itself. We show that TRAF6 is auto-ubiquitinated via Lys-63 linkages, which depends on an intact RING and the dimeric E2 enzyme Ubc13/Uev1A. Furthermore, the RING domain of TRAF6 is critical for the activation of NF-κB and for the induction of osteoclast differentiation through the stimulation of the transcription factor NFATc1. Strikingly, we identified a single critical Ub acceptor site residue (K124) in TRAF6 that is required for TRAF6 auto-ubiquitination. In transient expression studies, mutation of this site abolished TRAF6-mediated NEMO ubiquitination, TAK1 and IKK activation, NF-κB activation and osteoclast differentiation. Moreover, in stable TRAF6-deficient cells mutation of K124 of TRAF6 prevents TRAF6 ubiquitination and IKK activation after IL-1 stimulation. These data establish that regulated site-specific Lys-63-linked TRAF6 auto-ubiquitination is the critical upstream mediator of IKK activation, which may have general implications in other TRAF6-mediated signaling processes.

DISCUSSION

TRAF6 is one of the key adaptor molecules in the signal transduction of members of the TNF receptor superfamily and the IL-1 receptor/Toll-like receptor superfamily. To date, TRAF6 is the only member of the TRAF family that plays a critical role in osteoclastogenesis; its recruitment to the cytoplasmic domain of RANK initiates a signaling cascade that is crucial for the maturation of monocyte precursors to fully differentiated osteoclasts. However, the molecular events associated with TRAF6 in this process are not well understood. In this study, we clearly show that the RING domain of TRAF6 and the dimeric E2 enzyme Ubc13/Uev1A are critical for Lys-63-linked TRAF6 auto-ubiquitination and the ability of TRAF6 to activate IKK leading to the activation of NF-κB. In contrast to most studies of Ub-dependent TRAF6 signaling that only examined the activation of IKK, we further addressed this molecular mechanism on TRAF6 for its capacity to regulate osteoclast differentiation and maturation. Similar to previous reports ( 29 , 30 ), we observed that retroviral infection of RAW cells or mouse BMM with TRAF6 caused RANKL-independent osteoclast differentiation. However, we further show that a RING domain mutant of TRAF6 could not induce expression of NFATc1 nor induce the differentiation of monocytes to mature functional osteoclasts. Collectively, our results demonstrate the biological relevance of the RING domain of TRAF6, and hence its auto-ubiquitination for its ability to induce NFATc1 and terminal differentiation of osteoclasts.

Without the knowledge of specific ubiquitination sites, the precise role of TRAF6 auto-ubiquitination in its ability to activate downstream signaling events cannot be rigorously addressed. Therefore, we took on the task of identifying the Ub acceptor Lys residues in TRAF6 that are responsible for its auto-ubiquitination. Because the RING domain of TRAF6 interacts with its E2 and the ubiquitination site(s) should be sufficiently close to the E2 for ubiquitination to occur, we mutated the seven Lys residues within and surrounding the RING domain of TRAF6. By using a molecular model of the TRAF6 RING structure, we predicted that all of the mutated lysine residues are solvent exposed and their mutation to Arg would not alter the RING structure. Consistent with our prediction, each of the TRAF6 Lys mutants retained their ability to synthesize free poly-Ub chains. Through mutagenesis, we demonstrated that K124 is the major Ub acceptor site in TRAF6, which is required for its auto-ubiquitination. Importantly, the transient expression of the K124R mutant results in both signaling and biological defects: decreased TRAF6 auto-ubiquitination, loss of NEMO ubiquitination, lack of TAK1 and IKK activation, deficiency in NFATc1 induction, and impairment in mature osteoclast formation. Significantly, IL-1-dependent TRAF6 ubiquitination and IKK activation was abolished in stable TRAF6-deficient MEFs reconstituted with either the RING domain or the K124R mutant of TRAF6. Thus, by identifying a specific Lys-63-linked ubiquitination site on TRAF6 and determining the importance of this site, we have established a link between site-specific TRAF6 auto-ubiquitination and its ability to activate the IKK complex.

The identification of a single Lys residue for TRAF6 auto-ubiquitination points to a model of poly-, rather than multi-ubiquitination in NF-κB signaling, a question raised in a recent review ( 31 ), and reveals the potential specificity in this pathway of Lys-63-linked ubiquitination. In contrast, K48-linked ubiquitination is often not so site-specific. This is perhaps in tune with the different roles of K48- versus Lys-63-linked ubiquitination. The former is simply a “signal” for proteasomal destruction, which does not need to be site-specific. In contrast, Lys-63-linked ubiquitination may be important for assembly of signaling complexes, which might require the poly-Ub chains to be at a specific site of the target. Because Lys-63-linked ubiquitination uses the heterodimeric E2 enzyme Ubc13/Uev1A while K48-linked ubiquitination uses single component E2 enzymes, it is tempting to speculate that this difference may play a role in the apparent specificity.

Strikingly, the lack of TRAF6 auto-ubiquitination also resulted in the loss of NEMO ubiquitination, suggesting that TRAF6 may also be the E3 for NEMO. Up to now, the E3 for NEMO has been obscure. In the TNF pathway, cIAP1 was shown to be the E3 for NEMO ubiquitination ( 26 ), while the E3 for NOD2- or Bcl10-induced NEMO ubiquitination has not been identified ( 25 , 28 ). In this regard, because TRAF6 and TRAF2 appear to be the common elements in these pathways, it is possible that TRAFs are the unifying E3s for NEMO ubiquitination ( 32 , 33 ). Indeed, we have clearly demonstrated that TRAF6 serves as an E3 for NEMO ubiquitination using recombinant proteins, which is further supported by the lack of NEMO ubiquitination in TRAF6-deficient MEFs reconstituted with either a TRAF6 RING or K124R mutant. The failure of NEMO ubiquitination with these two TRAF6 mutants, may reflect the loss of recruitment of NEMO to the TRAF6 complex, because neither of these TRAF6 mutants are ubiquitinated. Consistent with this hypothesis, recent data have emerged implicating proteins with binding-specificity towards Lys-63-linked poly-Ub chains. Two such molecules TAB2 (or TAB3) through its C-terminal zinc finger domain and NEMO through a novel Ub-binding domain have been shown to preferentially bind Lys-63-linked poly Ub chains ( 10 , 34 , 35 ) (B. G. D., unpublished observations). These data may explain the necessity of Lys-63-linked auto-ubiquitination of TRAF6 to facilitate the recruitment and activation of the IKK complex. Nevertheless, the functional mechanism of ubiquitinated NEMO in assisting the activation of IKK remains to be investigated. One way to resolve these questions would be to identify the Ub acceptor sites on NEMO and assess the functional effects of eliminating them, which is currently under investigation.

In summary, the data presented here may provide molecular insight into the non-traditional role of Ub in TRAF6 signaling. In particular, we have shown that site-specific auto-ubiquitination of TRAF6 via the Lys-63 linkage is crucial for the activation of downstream kinases and transcription factors and further define a role of TRAF6 auto-ubiquitination in regulating osteoclast differentiation. Site-specific TRAF6 auto-ubiquitination appears to be a prerequisite that initiates a cascade of further downstream ubiquitination events, including the ubiquitination of components in the TAK1 and IKK complexes. Further studies are required to determine the specific role of each of the ubiquitination events in TRAF6-mediated IKK activation.
