---
pmid: '23878236'
title: Ion channel-kinase TRPM7 is required for maintaining cardiac automaticity.
authors:
- Sah R
- Mesirca P
- Van den Boogert M
- Rosen J
- Mably J
- Mangoni ME
- Clapham DE
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3740880
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1311865110
---

# Ion channel-kinase TRPM7 is required for maintaining cardiac automaticity.
**Authors:** Sah R, Mesirca P, Van den Boogert M, Rosen J, Mably J, Mangoni ME, Clapham DE
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1311865110](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1311865110)
**PMC:** [PMC3740880](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3740880/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Aug 6;110(32):E3037-46. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1311865110. Epub 2013 Jul 22.

Ion channel-kinase TRPM7 is required for maintaining cardiac automaticity.

Sah R(1), Mesirca P, Van den Boogert M, Rosen J, Mably J, Mangoni ME, Clapham 
DE.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 April 29;111(17):6528.

Sick sinus syndrome and atrioventricular block are common clinical problems, 
often necessitating permanent pacemaker placement, yet the pathophysiology of 
these conditions remains poorly understood. Here we show that Transient Receptor 
Potential Melastatin 7 (TRPM7), a divalent-permeant channel-kinase of unknown 
function, is highly expressed in embryonic myocardium and sinoatrial node (SAN) 
and is required for cardiac automaticity in these specialized tissues. TRPM7 
disruption in vitro, in cultured embryonic cardiomyocytes, significantly reduces 
spontaneous Ca(2+) transient firing rates and is associated with robust 
down-regulation of Hcn4, Cav3.1, and SERCA2a mRNA. TRPM7 knockdown in zebrafish, 
global murine cardiac Trpm7 deletion (KO(αMHC-Cre)), and tamoxifen-inducible SAN 
restricted Trpm7 deletion (KO(HCN4-CreERT2)) disrupts cardiac automaticity in 
vivo. Telemetered and sedated KO(αMHC-Cre) and KO(HCN4-CreERT2) mice show 
episodes of sinus pauses and atrioventricular block. Isolated SAN from 
KO(αMHC-Cre) mice exhibit diminished Ca(2+) transient firing rates with a 
blunted diastolic increase in Ca(2+). Action potential firing rates are 
diminished owing to slower diastolic depolarization. Accordingly, Hcn4 mRNA and 
the pacemaker current, I(f), are diminished in SAN from both KO(αMHC-Cre) and 
KO(HCN4-CreERT2) mice. Moreover, heart rates of KO(αMHC-Cre) mice are less 
sensitive to the selective I(f) blocker ivabradine, and acute application of the 
recently identified TRPM7 blocker FTY720 has no effect on action potential 
firing rates of wild-type SAN cells. We conclude that TRPM7 influences diastolic 
membrane depolarization and automaticity in SAN indirectly via regulation of 
Hcn4 expression.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1311865110
PMCID: PMC3740880
PMID: 23878236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Sick sinus syndrome and atrioventricular block are common clinical problems, often necessitating permanent pacemaker placement, yet the pathophysiology of these conditions remains poorly understood. Here we show that T ransient R eceptor P otential M elastatin 7 (TRPM7), a divalent-permeant channel-kinase of unknown function, is highly expressed in embryonic myocardium and sinoatrial node (SAN) and is required for cardiac automaticity in these specialized tissues. TRPM7 disruption in vitro, in cultured embryonic cardiomyocytes, significantly reduces spontaneous Ca 2+ transient firing rates and is associated with robust down-regulation of Hcn4 , Ca v 3.1 , and SERCA2a mRNA. TRPM7 knockdown in zebrafish, global murine cardiac Trpm7 deletion (KO αMHC-Cre ), and tamoxifen-inducible SAN restricted Trpm7 deletion ( KO HCN4-CreERT2 ) disrupts cardiac automaticity in vivo. Telemetered and sedated KO αMHC-Cre and KO HCN4-CreERT2 mice show episodes of sinus pauses and atrioventricular block. Isolated SAN from KO αMHC-Cre mice exhibit diminished Ca 2+ transient firing rates with a blunted diastolic increase in Ca 2+ . Action potential firing rates are diminished owing to slower diastolic depolarization. Accordingly, Hcn4 mRNA and the pacemaker current, I f , are diminished in SAN from both KO αMHC-Cre and KO HCN4-CreERT2 mice. Moreover, heart rates of KO αMHC-Cre mice are less sensitive to the selective I f blocker ivabradine, and acute application of the recently identified TRPM7 blocker FTY720 has no effect on action potential firing rates of wild-type SAN cells. We conclude that TRPM7 influences diastolic membrane depolarization and automaticity in SAN indirectly via regulation of Hcn4 expression.

Discussion

We sought to determine the contribution of TRPM7 to myocardial function by studying the consequences of cardiac-targeted Trpm7 deletion in vitro and in vivo. We show that TRPM7, when activated, forms a significant outwardly rectifying current in several different myocardial subtypes: with highest current densities in EVM > SAN > AVM. TRPM7 deletion in cultured EVM slows cardiac automaticity in vitro, as does TRPM7 knockdown in zebrafish. Moreover, in both global cardiac ( KO αMHC-Cre ) and inducible SAN-restricted ( KO Hcn4-CreERT2 ), TRPM7 deletion disrupts automaticity of isolated SAN and intact SAN (and likely AVN), manifesting as SPs and AVB in the adult mouse heart. Given that TRPM7 is known to conduct Ca 2+ ( 8 ), an obvious potential mechanism is that TRPM7 provides a Ca 2+ influx pathway important for cardiac automaticity. However, it important to note that TRPM7 currents are typically recorded under nonphysiological conditions, becoming fully activated after ∼10 min of cell dialysis (i.e., Mg 2+ chelation with EDTA/Na 2 ATP), in nominally free external Mg 2+ . Under these conditions, TRPM7 current density is used to assay the total amount of functional protein at the cell membrane as opposed to physiologically relevant current magnitudes. Under more physiological conditions, TRPM7 current is essentially inactive in SAN and EVM, as demonstrated by the initial currents on “break-in” ( Figs. S1 and S4 ). Thus, it is unlikely that TRPM7 contributes in a meaningful way to diastolic Ca 2+ influx, under basal conditions, given the strong outward rectification characteristic of TRPM7 and its further inhibition by physiological concentrations of extracellular Mg 2+ . Finally, TRPM7 blockade using FTY720 had no effect on WT SAN firing rates under basal physiological conditions ( Fig. S6 ).

There are a number of other ion channels, Hcn4 , Hcn2 , Ca v 3.1 , and Ca v 1.3 , nonetheless, that are considered important for cardiac automaticity ( 4 ). Indeed, expression analysis for these “automaticity” genes revealed significant reductions in Hcn4 , Ca v 3.1 , and SERCA2a mRNA in EVM upon TRPM7 deletion, whereas in SAN only Hcn4 mRNA was reduced. Consistent with these findings, the pacemaker current, I f (encoded by Hcn4 ), is significantly reduced in isolated SAN and associated with slowed diastolic depolarization. Furthermore, KO αMHC-Cre mice were less sensitive than WT mice to the negative chronotropic effects of the I f blocker ivabradine. Thus we conclude that TRPM7 is required for maintenance of cardiac automaticity via transcriptional regulation of Hcn4 expression (via an as yet unidentified pathway).

It is well established that the hyperpolarization-activated pacemaker current, I f , (encoded by Hcn4 ) contributes to basal automaticity in mouse SAN ( 24 – 26 ) and embryonic heart ( 27 ). However, there is controversy as to the extent of this contribution. Hcn4 knockout studies have demonstrated phenotypes ranging from profound bradycardia with AV block ( 24 ) to modest SPs ( 25 ), with no significant effect on mean heart rates in telemetered mice, similar to what we observe. Also consistent with our results, both of these studies show clear effects on firing rates and diastolic depolarization of isolated SAN cells. Furthermore, with maximal β-adrenergic stimulation (100 nM ISO), KO αMHC-Cre SAN largely overcome impairments in automaticity. This finding is consistent with the notion that I f current is an important determinant of spontaneous activity under basal conditions ( 25 ) but does not play an exclusive role in β-adrenergic regulation of pacemaking ( 26 ). With β-adrenergic stimulation, the membrane potential rises during late depolarization, and I f contributes less, allowing other ionic mechanisms, such as Ca v 3.1, Ca v 1.3, and SR Ca 2+ release, to dominate. It is also noteworthy that in both KO αMHC-Cre and KO Hcn4-CreERT2 mice, I f is reduced in a mosaic fashion such that there is a small population of SAN cells that contain near-normal I f current densities. Therefore, the KO phenotype of SPs with no significant change in mean HR over 24 h is consistent with a mechanism in which a population of SAN cells, with near-normal I f , supports “normal” automaticity by overdrive pacing the I f -deficient SAN cells. However, given the lower number of “normal” SAN cells, this overdrive pacing occasionally fails and results in SPs.

Another member of the TRPM family, Trpm4 , has been recently found to be mutated in forms of conduction system disease in humans, including progressive familial heart block I ( 28 , 29 ). These are thought to be gain-of-function mutations resulting in impaired TRPM4 endocytosis secondary to constitutive SUMOylation. The mechanism for this gain of function was deduced on the basis of heterologous expression studies in HEK cells and the observation that TRPM4 is enriched in human ( 28 ) and bovine ( 29 ) Purkinje cells. However, the mechanisms underlying TRPM4 gain-of-function contributions to conduction block has yet to be established. Because TRPM4 is a Ca 2+ -activated, sodium-selective current, one possibility is that increased TRPM4 current density results in further membrane depolarization in Purkinje cells, inactivating excitatory voltage-gated ionic currents and reducing the contribution of hyperpolarization-activated currents ( I f ) ( 28 ). To date, no gain-of-function mouse model data are available, and the Trpm4 −/− mouse, aside from hypertension ( 30 ), has not yet been shown to develop other cardiovascular phenotypes.

This article reports a TRP channel influencing the expression level of another ion channel(s) in SAN and EVM. The connection between TRPM7 and Hcn4 expression in SAN and EVM remains an intriguing question. We showed recently that TRPM7 is required for early events in cardiogenesis, and perturbations in TRPM7 function during ventricular development impair myocardial function, atrioventricular conduction, and repolarization ( 15 ). Thus, we surmised that embryonic deletion of TRPM7 in SAN/AVN tissue in KO αMHC-Cre mice might alter the maturation of SAN/AVN cells and consequently the expression of Hcn4 . However, SAN/AVN-restricted TRPM7 deletion in adult KO Hcn4-CreERT2 mice recapitulated the phenotype observed in KO αMHC-Cre mice, suggesting that the effect of TRPM7 on Hcn4 expression and automaticity in SAN represents, instead, a postdevelopmental effect. In this regard, it is noteworthy that SAN cells are more fetal-like, in that they are smaller, mononucleated, and retain automaticity, similar to early embryonic myocardium and in contrast to the larger, quiescent, multinucleated adult ventricular cells. Perhaps it is retention of this “embryonic” nature of SAN cells that allows them to remain sensitive to the effects of TRPM7 after the developmental phase.

A number of studies now show that the T-box transcription factor Tbx3 is critical in mediating the developmental programs leading to formation and function of SAN, AVN, and conduction system in murine heart ( 31 – 34 ). Indeed, the most marked differentially expressed gene upon manipulation of Tbx3 expression levels in myocardium is Hcn4 ( 33 ). In addition, Tbx3 -deficient mice exhibit both SAN and AVN dysfunction, manifested as SPs and AVB, respectively ( 35 ). Mef2 transcription factors have also been shown to directly regulate Hcn4 expression ( 36 ), and the Mef2a −/− mouse develops sinus arrhythmia and conduction block ( 37 ). We speculate that TRPM7 may influence these transcriptional pathways in heart, either directly or indirectly, to affect cellular differentiation. We showed recently that TRPM7 C-terminal kinase is cleaved from the channel in LN-18 cells undergoing Fas-induced apoptosis, and this cleavage induced an increase in TRPM7 channel activity that is required for apoptosis ( 38 ). Indeed, cleaved TRPM7 C-terminal kinase has been observed in other cell types ( 38 ), potentially freeing it to interact with cellular partners beyond the plasma membrane to modify transcriptional programs. We are currently testing these hypotheses.

In summary, we showed that TRPM7 is most highly expressed in EVM and SAN myocytes, and genetic ablation of Trpm7 in these cells severely disrupts automaticity in vitro and in vivo. Impaired automaticity in Trpm7 -deleted murine SAN cells arises from a lower and flatter slope of diastolic depolarization, associated with a slowed diastolic Ca 2+ rise and reduced pacemaker current I f (encoded by Hcn4 ). The next goal will be to determine how TRPM7 transcriptionally regulates genes in SAN and in embryonic myocardium to affect cardiac automaticity.

Methods

Refer to SI Methods for full methods.
