---
pmid: '22797754'
title: Peroxide-sensing transcriptional regulators in bacteria.
authors:
- Dubbs JM
- Mongkolsuk S
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3458676
doi: 10.1128/JB.00304-12
---

# Peroxide-sensing transcriptional regulators in bacteria.
**Authors:** Dubbs JM, Mongkolsuk S
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.00304-12](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.00304-12)
**PMC:** [PMC3458676](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3458676/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 2012 Oct;194(20):5495-503. doi: 10.1128/JB.00304-12. Epub 2012
Jul  13.

Peroxide-sensing transcriptional regulators in bacteria.

Dubbs JM(1), Mongkolsuk S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biotechnology, Chulabhorn Research Institute, Lak Si, Bangkok, 
Thailand. djames@cri.or.th

The ability to maintain intracellular concentrations of toxic reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) within safe limits is essential for all aerobic life forms. In 
bacteria, as well as other organisms, ROS are produced during the normal course 
of aerobic metabolism, necessitating the constitutive expression of ROS 
scavenging systems. However, bacteria can also experience transient high-level 
exposure to ROS derived either from external sources, such as the host defense 
response, or as a secondary effect of other seemingly unrelated environmental 
stresses. Consequently, transcriptional regulators have evolved to sense the 
levels of ROS and coordinate the appropriate oxidative stress response. Three 
well-studied examples of these are the peroxide responsive regulators OxyR, 
PerR, and OhrR. OxyR and PerR are sensors of primarily H(2)O(2), while OhrR 
senses organic peroxide (ROOH) and sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl). OxyR and OhrR 
sense oxidants by means of the reversible oxidation of specific cysteine 
residues. In contrast, PerR senses H(2)O(2) via the Fe-catalyzed oxidation of 
histidine residues. These transcription regulators also influence complex 
biological phenomena, such as biofilm formation, the evasion of host immune 
responses, and antibiotic resistance via the direct regulation of specific 
proteins.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00304-12
PMCID: PMC3458676
PMID: 22797754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The ability to maintain intracellular concentrations of toxic reactive oxygen species (ROS) within safe limits is essential for all aerobic life forms. In bacteria, as well as other organisms, ROS are produced during the normal course of aerobic metabolism, necessitating the constitutive expression of ROS scavenging systems. However, bacteria can also experience transient high-level exposure to ROS derived either from external sources, such as the host defense response, or as a secondary effect of other seemingly unrelated environmental stresses. Consequently, transcriptional regulators have evolved to sense the levels of ROS and coordinate the appropriate oxidative stress response. Three well-studied examples of these are the peroxide responsive regulators OxyR, PerR, and OhrR. OxyR and PerR are sensors of primarily H 2 O 2 , while OhrR senses organic peroxide (ROOH) and sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl). OxyR and OhrR sense oxidants by means of the reversible oxidation of specific cysteine residues. In contrast, PerR senses H 2 O 2 via the Fe-catalyzed oxidation of histidine residues. These transcription regulators also influence complex biological phenomena, such as biofilm formation, the evasion of host immune responses, and antibiotic resistance via the direct regulation of specific proteins.

INTRODUCTION

An effective oxidative stress defense response is a required item in the basic survival kit of all aerobic organisms as well as those anaerobes that exist in environments subject to transient exposures to oxygen. This is due to molecular oxygen's ability to accept electrons from cellular redox components to form toxic reactive oxygen species (ROS) ( 51 ). One such product is superoxide anion (O 2 •− ), which results from a one-electron reduction of O 2 . Another, resulting from a two-electron reduction, is hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) ( 51 ). Both O 2 •− and H 2 O 2 have the ability to oxidize exposed iron sulfur clusters, as has been observed for certain dehydratases ( 50 ), while H 2 O 2 is known to oxidize Fe 2+ in proteins containing mononuclear iron centers ( 100 ). This not only inactivates the enzymes but also results in the release of free ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), which is converted to ferrous iron (Fe 2+ ) in the intracellular reducing environment ( 51 ). This is significant since Fe 2+ can reduce H 2 O 2 to form hydroxyl radicals ( • OH) in the Fenton reaction as follows: Fe 2+ + H 2 O 2 → Fe 3+ + • OH + OH − .

Hydroxyl radicals are highly potent oxidants of cellular macromolecules that react at a diffusion-limited rate ( 51 ). Thus, the increased intracellular iron levels resulting from oxidative damage to a subset of iron-containing proteins can lead to increased • OH-mediated cellular damage, particularly to DNA ( 55 ). O 2 •− , H 2 O 2 , and • OH are all capable of causing a variety of oxidative lesions in proteins, DNA, and lipids ( 51 ). An important aspect of some of these secondary reactions is the production of a variety of organic peroxides that can also mediate further oxidative damage ( 97 ).

In addition to endogenous sources, bacteria also encounter ROS from external sources. Macrophages actively produce large amounts of O 2 •− and nitric oxide (NO • ) in order to kill invading pathogens ( 92 ). The host defense response in plants is similar and also includes the synthesis of organic peroxides ( 62 ), while some microorganisms excrete ROS to inhibit the growth of competitors ( 42 ). Exposure to redox cycling compounds, such as the herbicide paraquat, or naturally occurring quinones can also serve as a source of ROS. These molecules can participate in cyclic reactions in which they transfer an electron from cellular electron donors, such as NADH oxidases, to O 2 to generate O 2 •− ( 22 ).

Bacteria maintain a basal level of protective enzymes to detoxify O 2 •− and H 2 O 2 , thereby keeping their concentrations within safe limits ( 95 ). These include superoxide dismutases that use a metal center to catalyze the dismutation of O 2 •− to H 2 O 2 and catalases that usually employ a heme cofactor to convert H 2 O 2 to O 2 and H 2 O ( 50 ). Peroxiredoxins, a class of peroxidases, function to reduce H 2 O 2 and organic peroxides (ROOH) to either H 2 O or H 2 O and the corresponding alcohol (ROH) via the peroxide-mediated oxidation of cysteine thiols that are subsequently reduced using cellular electron donors to regenerate the active enzyme ( 88 , 94 ).

When ROS levels exceed safe limits, bacteria have the ability to mount an inducible response, resulting in increased expression of ROS detoxification enzymes along with additional protective systems that repair oxidative damage, protect vulnerable enzymes from inactivation, and control the levels of free Fe 2+ ( 87 ). For example, oxidative stress increases the demand for reducing equivalents, necessitating the induction of metabolic pathways to increase the reductant supply ( 32 ). The expression of iron-binding proteins, like Dps, is often induced in response to oxidative stress to reduce the levels of free Fe in order to prevent production of • OH via the Fenton reaction ( 12 ). Strategies are also employed to protect enzymes that contain vulnerable Fe-containing centers from oxidation by increasing the uptake of Mn 2+ , which is able to replace Fe 2+ at some active sites, rendering them resistant to oxidation ( 50 ). In some cases, Fe-containing enzymes are replaced with analogs that do not require Fe ( 70 ).

The regulation of the expression of genes involved in the bacterial oxidative stress defense response is complex and often under the control of regulators that can directly sense the levels of specific ROS and activate or derepress target gene transcription. This review summarizes work concerning the mechanisms of oxidant sensing and transcriptional regulation by OxyR, PerR, and OhrR, three well-studied peroxide responsive regulators that have the ability to distinguish between ROOH and H 2 O 2 ( 75 ). Two distinct mechanisms for peroxide sensing that utilize either the oxidation of cysteine residues (OxyR and OhrR) or the metal-catalyzed oxidation of histidine residues (PerR) have evolved in these regulators. In each case, oxidative modification of the regulator alters its DNA binding properties.

CONCLUSION

Much is known concerning the basic structural, mechanistic, and regulatory details of the peroxide-sensing regulators that are the subject of this review; however, many questions remain. Clearly, OxyR and its orthologs have evolved to sense a variety of oxidants in addition to H 2 O 2 and have assigned a role for OxyR as a sensor of nitrosative stress during anaerobic growth. There are at least two distinct mechanisms of oxidant sensing, involving oxidative modification of a sensing cysteine alone ( 13 , 98 ) or in concert with a second disulfide bonding partner ( 13 ), that are known in OxyR. There are also indications of the potential involvement of a third cysteine in peroxide sensing ( 4 ). The LysR-type regulator BenM, which controls genes involved in benzoate catabolism, is known to sense two coinducers (cis,cis-muconate and benzoate) that bind to distinct sites on the protein ( 23 ). Binding of each ligand singly activates transcription, while simultaneous binding of both coinducers results in a synergistic increase in target gene transcription ( 11 ) that is not observed for all BenM target promoters ( 21 ). It will be interesting to learn how oxidant-specific structural changes in OxyR affect promoter binding affinity and other OxyR-target promoter interactions as well as the ability of OxyR to interact with regulatory partners. Our knowledge of the full spectrum of oxidants that are sensed by these regulators is likely to be incomplete. For example, OhrR has only recently been shown to sense hypochlorite ( 17 ), while its natural organic peroxide inducers remain unidentified.

Finally, ROS are an important signal to pathogens, indicating contact with the host. There is a growing realization of the role of peroxide-sensing regulators in adapting to this environmental shift through the control of processes such as virulence factor expression ( 74 , 90 ) and biofilm formation ( 99 , 119 ). Furthermore, the lethality of some antibiotics is due, at least in part, to increased production of ROS ( 58 ), and it has been demonstrated that the levels of oxidative stress protective enzymes can affect antibiotic resistance levels ( 6 ). Therefore, a detailed understanding of the mechanisms and physiological functions of oxidative stress responsive regulators will further our understanding of bacterial adaptation to environmental changes in general and is likely to shed new light on aspects of many clinically important processes.
