---
pmid: '9891032'
title: Essential role of interferon regulatory factor 3 in direct activation of RANTES
  chemokine transcription.
authors:
- Lin R
- Heylbroeck C
- Genin P
- Pitha PM
- Hiscott J
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC116027
doi: 10.1128/MCB.19.2.959
---

# Essential role of interferon regulatory factor 3 in direct activation of RANTES chemokine transcription.
**Authors:** Lin R, Heylbroeck C, Genin P, Pitha PM, Hiscott J
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.19.2.959](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.19.2.959)
**PMC:** [PMC116027](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC116027/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Feb;19(2):959-66. doi: 10.1128/MCB.19.2.959.

Essential role of interferon regulatory factor 3 in direct activation of RANTES 
chemokine transcription.

Lin R(1), Heylbroeck C, Genin P, Pitha PM, Hiscott J.

Author information:
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical 
Research, McGill University, Montreal, Canada H3T 1E2.

Localized and systemic cytokine production in virus-infected cells play an 
important role in the outcome of viral infection and pathogenicity. Activation 
of the interferon regulatory factors (IRF) in turn is a critical mediator of 
cytokine gene transcription. Recent studies have focused on the 55-kDa IRF-3 
gene product as a direct transcriptional regulator of type 1 interferon 
(IFN-alpha and IFN-beta) activation in response to virus infection. Virus 
infection induces phosphorylation of IRF-3 on specific C-terminal serine 
residues and permits cytoplasmic-to-nuclear translocation of IRF-3, activation 
of DNA binding and transactivation potential, and association with the CBP/p300 
coactivator. We previously generated constitutively active [IRF-3(5D)] and 
dominant-negative forms of IRF-3 that control IFN-beta and IFN-alpha gene 
expression. In an effort to characterize the range of immunoregulatory genes 
controlled by IRF-3, we now demonstrate that endogenous human RANTES gene 
transcription is directly induced in tetracycline-inducible IRF-3(5D)-expressing 
cells or paramyxovirus-infected cells. We also show that a dominant-negative 
IRF-3 mutant inhibits virus-induced expression of the RANTES promoter. Specific 
mutagenesis of overlapping ISRE-like sites located between nucleotides -123 and 
-96 in the RANTES promoter reduces virus-induced and IRF-3-dependent activation. 
These studies broaden the range of IRF-3 immunoregulatory target genes to 
include at least one member of the chemokine superfamily.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.19.2.959
PMCID: PMC116027
PMID: 9891032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Localized and systemic cytokine production in virus-infected cells play an important role in the outcome of viral infection and pathogenicity. Activation of the interferon regulatory factors (IRF) in turn is a critical mediator of cytokine gene transcription. Recent studies have focused on the 55-kDa IRF-3 gene product as a direct transcriptional regulator of type 1 interferon (IFN-α and IFN-β) activation in response to virus infection. Virus infection induces phosphorylation of IRF-3 on specific C-terminal serine residues and permits cytoplasmic-to-nuclear translocation of IRF-3, activation of DNA binding and transactivation potential, and association with the CBP/p300 coactivator. We previously generated constitutively active [IRF-3(5D)] and dominant-negative forms of IRF-3 that control IFN-β and IFN-α gene expression. In an effort to characterize the range of immunoregulatory genes controlled by IRF-3, we now demonstrate that endogenous human RANTES gene transcription is directly induced in tetracycline-inducible IRF-3(5D)-expressing cells or paramyxovirus-infected cells. We also show that a dominant-negative IRF-3 mutant inhibits virus-induced expression of the RANTES promoter. Specific mutagenesis of overlapping ISRE-like sites located between nucleotides −123 and −96 in the RANTES promoter reduces virus-induced and IRF-3-dependent activation. These studies broaden the range of IRF-3 immunoregulatory target genes to include at least one member of the chemokine superfamily.

DISCUSSION

In the present study, we demonstrate that infection with Sendai virus or expression of the constitutively activated phosphomimetic form of IRF-3 directly binds to and stimulates transcription of the human RANTES promoter via the overlapping ISRE elements. Mutation of the ISRE sites blocked the IRF-3(5D)-induced or virus-mediated expression from this promoter. Together with the repression of virus-induced expression of the RANTES gene by the dominant-negative IRF-3 mutant, these results demonstrate that IRF-3 plays a primary role in the virus-inducible activation of RANTES gene. Thus at least one member of the chemokine superfamily is also directly targeted by the virus-dependent, posttranslational activation of IRF-3.

Other members of the IRF family of transcription factors are potentially able to stimulate transcription from promoters containing ISRE-like elements, including IRF-1, IRF-7, and ISGF3γ/p48. ISGF3γ/p48 recognizes and binds to various ISREs but exerts its transcriptional activity exclusively in association with the STAT1 and STAT2 proteins, as part of the ISGF-3 complex ( 24 , 37 ). Based on the present data, ISGF3 does not appear to regulate direct induction of RANTES. Transcription was not activated by type I IFN (Fig. 2 A, lane 2) and in transient cotransfection assays, treatment with IFN-α/β or IFN-γ had little or no effect on the activity of the RANTES-CAT reporter (data not shown), indicating the JAK-STAT pathway and the ISGF3 complex do not contribute to RANTES activation in 293 cells. Similarly, in coexpression studies, IRF-1 and IRF-7 failed to play a major role in the activation of the RANTES promoter (Fig. 5 A).

RANTES, an important inflammatory chemoattractant for monocytes, T cells and eosinophils ( 13 , 33 ), is a member of CC-chemokine family ( 26 , 28 ) and is expressed after cellular activation in fibroblasts, T cells, monocytes, endothelial cells, and certain epithelial cells ( 15 ). RANTES and CC-chemokines MIP-1α and MIP-1β were identified as the major HIV-suppressive factors released by cytotoxic-suppressor CD8 + T-lymphocytes ( 4 ), acting via the inhibition of macrophage-tropic but not T cell-tropic HIV-1 strains ( 6 ). It is now well recognized that the chemokine receptor CCR5—a seven-transmembrane, G-protein coupled receptor found on T cells and macrophages—functions as an HIV-1 fusion cofactor and binds RANTES, MIP-1α, and MIP-1β. Expression of CCR5 in the presence of CD4 confers permissiveness to membrane fusion by M-tropic virus strains ( 6 ). It has been recently demonstrated that RANTES also inhibits infection by certain T-tropic HIV-1 viruses ( 34 ).

RANTES is expressed relatively late after activation of peripheral blood T cells by antigen or mitogens but is rapidly induced in normal fibroblasts and epithelial cells by TNF-α and IL-1β, suggesting that different control mechanisms may regulate RANTES transcriptional activation ( 22 ). Among the multiple regulatory domains identified in the RANTES upstream promoter are two binding sites for the NF-κB transcription factors, located between positions −78 to −42 upstream from the transcription initiation site ( 19 , 23 , 27 ). Induction of NF-κB plays an important role in RANTES gene activation by stimuli such as PMA-ionomycin, proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α and IL-1), or anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies ( 19 ); furthermore, NF-AT-like and a CD28RE-like motifs also serve as NF-κB binding sites ( 19 ). In contrast, the NF-κB sites in the murine RANTES promoter failed to play a significant role in virus-mediated activation of this gene ( 15 ). Sequence analysis of the murine RANTES promoter revealed that a number of regulatory motifs in human RANTES promoter are also present in murine RANTES promoter, including NF-κB and an IRF-1 response element ( 5 ). However, this study demonstrates for the first time the involvement of an IRF family member in the regulation of RANTES gene expression.

Viruses are known to acquire and modify genes of cellular origin to gain a survival advantage against host defenses. This evolutionary subversion by viruses also provides important clues concerning defense strategies that are critical to the generation of a successful immune response to particular viral pathogens. For example, several viral chemokine receptors have been discovered (reviewed in reference 20 ). The first functional viral chemokine receptor identified and characterized was ECRF3 of herpesvirus saimiri, the receptor for the CXC chemokines IL-8, GROα, and NAP-2 ( 1 ). A viral chemokine receptor encoded by the human CMV US28 gene binds the CC-chemokines RANTES, MIP-1α, and MIP-1β ( 9 ) and interferes with chemokine function. It has been suggested that herpesvirus saimiri and human CMV may use chemokine receptors to control viral replication by regulating cell cycle progression of the host cell or by inhibiting cellular apoptosis ( 20 ). In contrast, several poxvirus cytokine receptor homologues have been discovered that are secreted into the extracellular milieu ( 16 ). Poxviruses may use these receptors as secreted cytokine antagonists to scavenge host cytokines and block the generation of an antiviral defense cascade, mediated in part by cytokine receptor signalling.

In many respects, IRF-3 has a mode of activation similar to that of the NF-κB factors. In unstimulated cells, NF-κB heterodimers are retained in the cytoplasm by the inhibitory IκB proteins. Upon stimulation by many inducers, including cytokines, viruses, and dsRNA, IκBα is rapidly phosphorylated and degraded, resulting in the release of NF-κB ( 3 ). Thus, both IRF-3 and NF-κB are present in an inactive form localized to the cytoplasm in unstimulated cells. Virus-induced phosphorylation of IRF-3 at the C-terminal Ser-Thr cluster between amino acids 396 to 405 appears to alter the conformation of IRF-3 to permit nuclear translocation, DNA binding, transactivation, and interaction with the CBP/p300 coactivator ( 14 , 21 , 37 – 39 ). Subsequent degradation of IRF-3 by a phosphorylation-dependent, proteasome-dependent pathway ( 14 ) is also reminiscent of IκBα phosphorylation and degradation, which leads to the induction of NF-κB DNA binding activity ( 3 ). In this study, we demonstrated that IRF-3 plays an essential role in the virus-inducible activation of RANTES gene expression and the adjacent NF-κB sites also contribute, indicating that following virus infection, activated forms of IRF-3 and NF-κB bind to the cis -elements of the RANTES promoter and synergistically stimulate human RANTES transcription. The possibility of the involvement of common signalling pathways controlling IRF-3 and NF-κB phosphorylation is currently under investigation.
