---
pmid: '18845848'
title: A genomewide suppressor and enhancer analysis of cdc13-1 reveals varied cellular
  processes influencing telomere capping in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Addinall SG
- Downey M
- Yu M
- Zubko MK
- Dewar J
- Leake A
- Hallinan J
- Shaw O
- James K
- Wilkinson DJ
- Wipat A
- Durocher D
- Lydall D
journal: Genetics
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC2600956
doi: 10.1534/genetics.108.092577
---

# A genomewide suppressor and enhancer analysis of cdc13-1 reveals varied cellular processes influencing telomere capping in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Addinall SG, Downey M, Yu M, Zubko MK, Dewar J, Leake A, Hallinan J, Shaw O, James K, Wilkinson DJ, Wipat A, Durocher D, Lydall D
**Journal:** Genetics (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1534/genetics.108.092577](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.108.092577)
**PMC:** [PMC2600956](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2600956/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2008 Dec;180(4):2251-66. doi: 10.1534/genetics.108.092577. Epub 2008
 Oct 9.

A genomewide suppressor and enhancer analysis of cdc13-1 reveals varied cellular 
processes influencing telomere capping in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Addinall SG(1), Downey M, Yu M, Zubko MK, Dewar J, Leake A, Hallinan J, Shaw O, 
James K, Wilkinson DJ, Wipat A, Durocher D, Lydall D.

Author information:
(1)School of Computing Science, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 
7RU, United Kingdom.

In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Cdc13 binds telomeric DNA to recruit telomerase and 
to "cap" chromosome ends. In temperature-sensitive cdc13-1 mutants telomeric DNA 
is degraded and cell-cycle progression is inhibited. To identify novel proteins 
and pathways that cap telomeres, or that respond to uncapped telomeres, we 
combined cdc13-1 with the yeast gene deletion collection and used 
high-throughput spot-test assays to measure growth. We identified 369 gene 
deletions, in eight different phenotypic classes, that reproducibly demonstrated 
subtle genetic interactions with the cdc13-1 mutation. As expected, we 
identified DNA damage checkpoint, nonsense-mediated decay and telomerase 
components in our screen. However, we also identified genes affecting casein 
kinase II activity, cell polarity, mRNA degradation, mitochondrial function, 
phosphate transport, iron transport, protein degradation, and other functions. 
We also identified a number of genes of previously unknown function that we term 
RTC, for restriction of telomere capping, or MTC, for maintenance of telomere 
capping. It seems likely that many of the newly identified pathways/processes 
that affect growth of budding yeast cdc13-1 mutants will play evolutionarily 
conserved roles at telomeres. The high-throughput spot-testing approach that we 
describe is generally applicable and could aid in understanding other aspects of 
eukaryotic cell biology.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.108.092577
PMCID: PMC2600956
PMID: 18845848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In Saccharomyces cerevisiae , Cdc13 binds telomeric DNA to recruit telomerase and to “cap” chromosome ends. In temperature-sensitive cdc13-1 mutants telomeric DNA is degraded and cell-cycle progression is inhibited. To identify novel proteins and pathways that cap telomeres, or that respond to uncapped telomeres, we combined cdc13-1 with the yeast gene deletion collection and used high-throughput spot-test assays to measure growth. We identified 369 gene deletions, in eight different phenotypic classes, that reproducibly demonstrated subtle genetic interactions with the cdc13-1 mutation. As expected, we identified DNA damage checkpoint, nonsense-mediated decay and telomerase components in our screen. However, we also identified genes affecting casein kinase II activity, cell polarity, mRNA degradation, mitochondrial function, phosphate transport, iron transport, protein degradation, and other functions. We also identified a number of genes of previously unknown function that we term RTC , for r estriction of t elomere c apping, or MTC , for m aintenance of t elomere c apping. It seems likely that many of the newly identified pathways/processes that affect growth of budding yeast cdc13-1 mutants will play evolutionarily conserved roles at telomeres. The high-throughput spot-testing approach that we describe is generally applicable and could aid in understanding other aspects of eukaryotic cell biology.

RESULTS

A screen for gene deletions that suppress or enhance cdc13-1 temperature sensitivity was undertaken using the SGA technique ( T ong et al. 2001 ; T ong and B oone 2006 ) as described in materials and methods and supplemental Methods. High-throughput yeast spot tests ( materials and methods ; supplemental Methods; Figure 1 ) were used to identify gene deletions, which allowed growth of strains carrying the cdc13-1 mutation at the otherwise nonpermissive temperature of 27°. Five of these (identified during initial screens 1 and 2; supplemental Table S1) were described previously ( D owney et al. 2006 ). At the end of a comprehensive screening process during which a minimum of 4 and a maximum of 15 biological replicates for each viable gene deletion had been tested (supplemental Table S1), a high confidence list of 238 gene deletion suppressors of cdc13-1 temperature sensitivity was obtained ( Table 1 ). Of these 238, 37 strains that grew at the higher nonpermissive temperature of 28° (screens 3 and 4, supplemental Table S1) were classed as strong suppressors ( Table 1 ). A number of gene deletions that have previously been described as cdc13-1 suppressors were identified in our screen ( Table 2 ). These included deletions of RAD9 , RAD17 , RAD24 , EXO1 , and CHK1 among the group of strong suppressors ( Table 1 ), consistent with previous studies ( e.g. , M aringele and L ydall 2002 ; Z ubko et al. 2004 ).

Our approach also allowed us to identify gene deletions that were lethal or sick in combination with cdc13-1 because double mutants were either missing or poor growers after SGA ( materials and methods ; supplemental Methods; supplemental Figure S2). Twenty genes demonstrated synthetic lethal and 32 showed synthetic-sick interactions with cdc13-1 at 20° ( Table 3 ).

In the discussion , we speculate on the roles of these cdc13-1 suppressor and enhancer genes in telomere biology.

DISCUSSION

The objective of our study was to identify proteins and pathways that cap telomeres or regulate the cellular response to uncapped telomeres. We combined the S. cerevisiae gene deletion collection with the well-defined, temperature-sensitive, and reversible cdc13-1 mutation using the SGA strain construction technique and we developed and optimized high-throughput yeast growth assays. Although others have looked systematically for synthetic lethality with temperature-sensitive mutations ( e.g. , M easday et al. 2005 ; B aetz et al. 2006 ), to the best of our knowledge, a genomewide screen for gene deletions that confer subtle suppressor/enhancer phenotypes on a temperature-sensitive mutation has not previously been reported. Our approach therefore complements other high-throughput genetic techniques such as SGA ( T ong et al. 2001 ; R oguev et al. 2007 ) and synthetic dosage lethal analysis ( M easday et al. 2005 ).

We screened for gene deletions that suppress the lethality of cdc13-1 at the nonpermissive temperature and genes that compromise or contribute to the “reversibility” of cdc13-1 mutants. Combined with synthetic-lethal and synthetic-sick data from the SGA procedure, this resulted in five overlapping categories of CDC13 interactors: suppressors of cdc13-1 , synthetic lethal with cdc13-1 , synthetic sick with cdc13-1 , UD S , and UD R —the latter two categories, respectively, having RAD9 -like and EXO1 -like subclasses, giving eight classes in all. Many of the genes identified as interacting with CDC13 fit into pathways with previously recognized roles in telomere biology ( Table 5 ). However, a significant number of genes identified in this study have previously uncharacterized relationships to telomere function. A more detailed analysis of their roles is likely to provide novel information about eukaryotic telomere biology; for example, in the same way as Exo1, discovered to have telomere-related function in yeast ( M aringele and L ydall 2002 ), plays a role in life-span determination of telomerase knockout mice ( S chaetzlein et al. 2007 ).
