---
pmid: '21719596'
title: A comprehensive functional characterization of BRCA2 variants associated with
  Fanconi anemia using mouse ES cell-based assay.
authors:
- Biswas K
- Das R
- Alter BP
- Kuznetsov SG
- Stauffer S
- North SL
- Burkett S
- Brody LC
- Meyer S
- Byrd RA
- Sharan SK
journal: Blood
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC3167357
doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-324541
---

# A comprehensive functional characterization of BRCA2 variants associated with Fanconi anemia using mouse ES cell-based assay.
**Authors:** Biswas K, Das R, Alter BP, Kuznetsov SG, Stauffer S, North SL, Burkett S, Brody LC, Meyer S, Byrd RA, Sharan SK
**Journal:** Blood (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2010-12-324541](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2010-12-324541)
**PMC:** [PMC3167357](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3167357/)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2011 Sep 1;118(9):2430-42. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-324541. Epub 2011
 Jun 30.

A comprehensive functional characterization of BRCA2 variants associated with 
Fanconi anemia using mouse ES cell-based assay.

Biswas K(1), Das R, Alter BP, Kuznetsov SG, Stauffer S, North SL, Burkett S, 
Brody LC, Meyer S, Byrd RA, Sharan SK.

Author information:
(1)Mouse Cancer Genetics Program, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute at Frederick, Frederick, MD, USA.

Biallelic mutations in the human breast cancer susceptibility gene, BRCA2, are 
associated with Fanconi anemia, implying that some persons who inherit 2 
deleterious variants of BRCA2 are able to survive even though it is well 
established that BRCA2 is indispensable for viability in mice. One such variant, 
IVS7 + 2T > G, results in premature protein truncation because of skipping of 
exon 7. Surprisingly, the persons who are either IVS7 + 2T > G homozygous or 
compound heterozygous are born alive but die of malignancy associated with 
Fanconi anemia. Using a mouse embryonic stem cell-based functional assay, we 
found that the IVS7 + 2T > G allele produces an alternatively spliced transcript 
lacking exons 4-7, encoding an in-frame BRCA2 protein with an internal deletion 
of 105 amino acids (BRCA2(Δ105)). We demonstrate that BRCA2(Δ105) is proficient 
in homologous recombination-mediated DNA repair as measured by different 
functional assays. Evaluation of this transcript in normal and leukemia cells 
suggests that BRCA2(Δ105) may contribute to the viability of persons inheriting 
this mutation. In this study, we have also characterized 5 other BRCA2 variants 
and found 3 of these (p.L2510P, p.R2336H, and p.W2626C) to be deleterious and 2 
(p.I2490T and p.K2729N) probably neutral. Such studies are important to 
understand the functional significance of unclassified BRCA2 variants.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-324541
PMCID: PMC3167357
PMID: 21719596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Biallelic mutations in the human breast cancer susceptibility gene, BRCA2 , are associated with Fanconi anemia, implying that some persons who inherit 2 deleterious variants of BRCA2 are able to survive even though it is well established that BRCA2 is indispensable for viability in mice. One such variant, IVS7 + 2T > G, results in premature protein truncation because of skipping of exon 7. Surprisingly, the persons who are either IVS7 + 2T > G homozygous or compound heterozygous are born alive but die of malignancy associated with Fanconi anemia. Using a mouse embryonic stem cell–based functional assay, we found that the IVS7 + 2T > G allele produces an alternatively spliced transcript lacking exons 4-7, encoding an in-frame BRCA2 protein with an internal deletion of 105 amino acids (BRCA2 Δ105 ). We demonstrate that BRCA2 Δ105 is proficient in homologous recombination-mediated DNA repair as measured by different functional assays. Evaluation of this transcript in normal and leukemia cells suggests that BRCA2 Δ105 may contribute to the viability of persons inheriting this mutation. In this study, we have also characterized 5 other BRCA2 variants and found 3 of these (p.L2510P, p.R2336H, and p.W2626C) to be deleterious and 2 (p.I2490T and p.K2729N) probably neutral. Such studies are important to understand the functional significance of unclassified BRCA2 variants.

Introduction

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare and predominantly autosomal recessive disorder characterized by defective DNA repair and chromosomal instability. 1 , 2 Studies of this rare disorder have elucidated the general mechanisms of DNA repair, bone marrow failure, and cancer pathogenesis. Homozygous or biallelic mutations of 14 genes ( FANCA , FANCB , FANCC , FANCD1 , FANCD2 , FANCE , FANCF , FANCG , FANCI , FANCJ , FANCL , FANCM , FANCN , and FANCP ) are associated with the development of FA. 1 – 3 Recently, biallelic mutations in RAD51C have also been found in patients with FA-like disease. 4 Because FANCB is located on X-chromosome, affected males harbor a single mutant allele. Many of the proteins encoded by these genes exist in a macromolecular complex involved in the recognition and repair of damaged DNA. 2 , 4 , 5 , 6 FANCD1/BRCA2 interacts directly with FANCN, FANCD2, and FANCG. 7 – 9 A number of genes involved in the FA pathway have been found to be inactivated in a variety of cancers. Four genes ( FANCD1 , FANCN , FANCJ , and RAD51C ) in this pathway have been shown to be breast cancer susceptibility genes. 2 , 10 Mutations in FANCD1 , FANCC , FANCN , and FANCG have been found also to be associated with pancreatic cancer. 2 , 11 , 12

Among the different FA-complementation groups, the clinical phenotypes of FANCD1/BRCA2 (FA-D1) and FANCN/PALB2 (FA-N) are indistinguishable and also most severe in terms of very early age at onset, as well as high risks of leukemia, and specific spectrum of solid tumors. 1 , 13 Patients in the FA-D1 subgroup have been identified to carry biallelic mutations in BRCA2 , including 2 clearly deleterious or a clearly deleterious mutation in one allele and a missense mutation or variants of unknown clinical significance in the other allele. Interestingly, several of these FA-associated variants are located near the C-terminus of BRCA2 protein, or more specifically, between positions 2336 and 2729 (supplemental Figure 1, available on the Blood Web site; see the Supplemental Materials link at the top of the online article). 1 It is important for appropriate genetic counseling and risk factor assessment of mutation carriers to determine whether these variants lead to functional inactivation or retain normal BRCA2 activity. Limited availability of family history and mutation linkage data have been barriers in the classification of these missense mutations. A recently reported functional assay using mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells has now made it feasible to characterize any variant identified in human BRCA2 . 14

In this study, we have functionally evaluated 5 variants of unknown significance (p.R2336H [ c.7235G > A ], p.I2490T [ c.7697T > C ], p.L2510P [ c.7757T > C ], p.W2626C [ c.8106G > C ], and p.K2729N [ c.8415G > T ]) and 1 splice-site mutation c.864 + 2T > G (for simplicity referred to as IVS7 + 2T > G) and examined their effect on BRCA2 function using the ES cell–based functional assay ( Table 1 ). In addition to IVS7 + 2T > G, p.R2336H is also known to affect splicing and both are considered to be deleterious. 22 – 24 The other 4 (p.I2490T, p.L2510P, p.W2626C, and p.K2729N) are listed as variants of unknown clinical significance in the Breast Cancer Information database ( http://research.nhgri.nih.gov/bic ; supplemental Table 1). We have also examined the effect of these variants on the structural integrity of BRCA2, using structural modeling to support the functional data. Our findings demonstrate the usefulness of the ES cell–based assay to understand the functional effect of BRCA2 variants associated with FA that are currently considered to be of unknown clinical significance because of limited functional and family linkage data.

Discussion

Biallelic mutations in BRCA2 can cause a very severe FA subtype associated with malignancy very early in life. Several of the reported BRCA2 mutations associated with FA are missense variants. To understand the clinical and cellular features of this FA subgroup and determine whether the missense variants contribute to the disease, the functional effects of BRCA2 variants of unknown clinical significance need to be examined carefully. The development of a novel assay by Kuznetsov et al using mouse ES cells has made it possible to analyze different kinds of mutations identified in BRCA2 . 14 We have now used this assay to examine 5 BRCA2 missense variants and one splice-site mutation ( Table 1 ). Although this assay has been successfully used to analyze several BRCA2 variants 14 , 37 because mouse cells are used to examine the effect of mutations in a human gene, the data should be cautiously analyzed, especially for splicing mutations. Therefore, when possible, we have validated our findings in human cells.

Among all the FANCD1/BRAC2 mutations reported in FA-D1 patients, IVS7 + 2T > G is the only one that has been detected as homozygous. 19 This mutation causes skipping of exon 7, and a frameshift leading to a premature protein truncation is predicted. 23 The mutation is strongly associated with the development of AML in FA patients very early in life; and according to the Breast Cancer Information database, this mutation has also been found in families with breast and ovarian cancer. 1 In our functional assay, it showed the most severe phenotype and failed to rescue the ES cell lethality. We found an alternatively spliced transcript that encodes BRCA2 Δ105 is expressed at very low levels in ES cells. Higher expression of this variant in c.809G > A mutants resulted in viable Brca2 KO/KO ES cells. However, the inability of BRCA2 Δ105 to rescue the lethality of ES cells to the same extent as the WT BRCA2 suggests that some function(s) other than DNA repair may be disrupted. The deleted 105 amino acids do not contain any domain known for HR repair, but a Plk1 phosphorylation site of BRCA2 (Ser, 193 Ser 205/206 , and Thr 203/207 ) is located in this region. Phosphorylation of BRCA2 in this region regulates the interaction with histone acetyltransferase P/CAF. 38 The precise role of BRCA2-P/CAF complex has not yet been elucidated, but it was predicted that this phosphorylation of BRCA2 may be associated with entry or control of mitosis. 38 Deletion of this region may affect ES cell survival. It is interesting that the cells that do survive do not show any defect in proliferation or plating efficiency. Although we do not know the precise mechanism, it is possible that the surviving cells express BRCA2 Δ105 above a threshold level that allows them to overcome this defect.

Here, we have analyzed the splicing of a human gene in mouse ES cells and identified a potential splice variant that is highly expressed in the presence of IVS7 + 2T > G mutation. Our ES cell findings were subsequently validated in human cells. The expression of Δexons 4-7 transcript in a IVS7 + 2T > G mutation carrier and its lower expression in the leukemia cells suggest that the expression of this splice variant may be regulated and depend on several factors, such as tissue-type or developmental stage. 39 , 40 It is probable that the fetal viability with a severe FA phenotype and early malignancy in persons who are homozygous or compound heterozygous for IVS7 + 2T > G may be associated with loss of this splice variant. Although the precise mechanism is not known, this loss may be the result of a change or defect in some splicing factor. It is also possible that the expression of Δexons 4-7 transcript is sufficient to sustain life in humans but is not enough to support normal functions of BRCA2, and the patients have FA and malignancy very early in life.

Interestingly, in this study, we have also demonstrated that the c.809G > A mutation that is predicted to generate an N-terminal truncation (W194X), actually produces a BRCA2 variant (BRCA2 Δ105 ) that is fully proficient in DNA DSBR function. This suggests that, even though some alleles may be predicted to cause premature protein truncation, they may express an alternatively spliced transcript that can generate a functional protein. Our characterization of IVS7 + 2T > G and W194X demonstrates the importance of the careful functional analysis of each variant. To what extent alternative splicing of other FA genes or other human disease genes occurs would be an important question that needs to be addressed before drawing conclusions about the effect of any sequence variants on its biologic functions.

Our structural and functional analysis of 5 other variants has revealed that, although p.R2336H, p.L2510P, and p.W2626C can rescue the ES cell lethality, the rescued cells have significantly attenuated BRCA2 functions. Based on the reduced ES cell viability, these are considered hypomorphic. However, because of significant defect in BRCA2 functions, these are probably deleterious. In contrast, p.I2490T and p.K2729N variants are neutral. Although these 2 variants have been identified in persons with FA (a p.I2490T/5301insA compound heterozygote have FA and medulloblastoma at the age of 3.5 years 17 and a person with p.K2729N/S2835X variants was diagnosed with FA and developed AML 16 ), they are not likely to be causal. p.I2490T was previously predicted to be a neutral variant by Offit et al 17 as well as by Myriad Genetics Laboratories Inc 41 based on its prevalence in unaffected persons. p.K2729N variant was classified as neutral using multifactorial likelihood model and a few BRCA2 functional assays. 24 Hu et al also showed that p.K2729N is a neutral variant rather than a familial eosophageal cancer-causing mutation in the Chinese population. 42 Although we cannot rule out the possibility that these variants may behave differently when present in association with another deleterious allele, our ES cell–based assay and the available evidence strongly suggest that p.I2490T and p.K2729N variants may not be the cause of FA. Therefore, a careful reevaluation may identify the causal mutation in p.I2490T and p.K2729N carriers who had FA that was indistinguishable from those patients with biallelic deleterious mutations, including severe physical findings and cancer. In conclusion, we recognize the value of the epidemiologic analyses of variants; however, when combined with functional analyses, they can be more accurate in predicting the nature of the variants identified in human disease gene, as exemplified here for the rare cases of FA-D1 (∼ 3% of all FA patients).
