---
pmid: '15010471'
title: Dynamic control of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator Cl(-)/HCO3(-)
  selectivity by external Cl(-).
authors:
- Shcheynikov N
- Kim KH
- Kim KM
- Dorwart MR
- Ko SB
- Goto H
- Naruse S
- Thomas PJ
- Muallem S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M313323200
---

# Dynamic control of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator Cl(-)/HCO3(-) selectivity by external Cl(-).
**Authors:** Shcheynikov N, Kim KH, Kim KM, Dorwart MR, Ko SB, Goto H, Naruse S, Thomas PJ, Muallem S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M313323200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M313323200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 21;279(21):21857-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M313323200. Epub 
2004 Mar 9.

Dynamic control of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator 
Cl(-)/HCO3(-) selectivity by external Cl(-).

Shcheynikov N(1), Kim KH, Kim KM, Dorwart MR, Ko SB, Goto H, Naruse S, Thomas 
PJ, Muallem S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Graduate Program in Molecular Biophysics, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas 
75390-9040, USA.

HCO(3)(-) secretion is a vital activity in cystic fibrosis transmembrane 
conductance regulator (CFTR)-expressing epithelia. However, the role of CFTR in 
this activity is not well understood. Simultaneous measurements of membrane 
potential and pH(i) and/or current in CFTRexpressing Xenopus oocytes revealed 
dynamic control of CFTR Cl(-)/HCO(3)(-) permeability ratio, which is regulated 
by external Cl(-) (Cl(-)(o)). Thus, reducing external Cl(-) from 110 to 0-10 mm 
resulted in the expected increase in membrane potential, but with no 
corresponding OH(-) or HCO(3)(-) influx. Approximately 3-4 min after reducing 
Cl(o)(-) to 0 mm, an abrupt switch in membrane potential occurs that coincided 
with an increased rates of OH(-) and HCO(3)(-) influx. The switch in membrane 
permeability to OH(-)/HCO(3)(-) can also be recorded as a leftward shift in the 
reversal potential. Furthermore, an increased rate of OH(-) influx in response 
to elevating pH(o) to 9.0 was observed only after the switch in membrane 
potential. The time to switch increased to 11 min at Cl(o)(-) of 5 mm. 
Conversely, re-addition of external Cl(-) after the switch in membrane potential 
did not stop HCO(3)(-) influx, which continued for about 3.9 min after Cl(-) 
addition. Importantly, addition of external Cl(-) to cells incubated in 
Cl(-)-free medium never resulted in HCO(3)(-) efflux. Voltage and current clamp 
experiments showed that the delayed HCO(3)(-) transport is electrogenic. These 
results indicate that CFTR exists in two conformations, a Cl(-) only and a Cl(-) 
and OH(-)/HCO(3)(-) permeable state. The switch between the states is controlled 
by external Cl(-). Accordingly, a different tryptic pattern of CFTR was found 
upon digestion in Cl(-)-containing and Cl(-)-free media. The physiological 
significance of these finding is discussed in the context of HCO(3)(-) secretion 
by tissues such as the pancreas and salivary glands.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M313323200
PMID: 15010471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
