---
pmid: '28193844'
title: Heme Assimilation in Schizosaccharomyces pombe Requires Cell-surface-anchored
  Protein Shu1 and Vacuolar Transporter Abc3.
authors:
- Mourer T
- Normant V
- Labbé S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC5377804
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M117.776807
---

# Heme Assimilation in Schizosaccharomyces pombe Requires Cell-surface-anchored Protein Shu1 and Vacuolar Transporter Abc3.
**Authors:** Mourer T, Normant V, Labbé S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M117.776807](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M117.776807)
**PMC:** [PMC5377804](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5377804/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2017 Mar 24;292(12):4898-4912. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M117.776807. Epub
 2017 Feb 13.

Heme Assimilation in Schizosaccharomyces pombe Requires Cell-surface-anchored 
Protein Shu1 and Vacuolar Transporter Abc3.

Mourer T(1), Normant V(1), Labbé S(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Département de Biochimie, Faculté de médecine et des sciences de la 
santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec J1E 4K8, Canada.
(2)From the Département de Biochimie, Faculté de médecine et des sciences de la 
santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec J1E 4K8, Canada 
Simon.Labbe@USherbrooke.ca.

The Schizosaccharomyces pombe shu1+ gene encodes a cell-surface protein required 
for assimilation of exogenous heme. In this study, shaving experiments showed 
that Shu1 is released from membrane preparations when spheroplast lysates are 
incubated with phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C (PI-PLC). Shu1 
cleavability by PI-PLC and its predicted hydropathy profile strongly suggested 
that Shu1 is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored protein. When heme 
biosynthesis is selectively blocked in hem1Δ mutant cells, the heme analog zinc 
mesoporphyrin IX (ZnMP) first accumulates into vacuoles and then subsequently, 
within the cytoplasm in a rapid and Shu1-dependent manner. An HA4-tagged shu1+ 
allele that retained wild-type function localizes to the cell surface in 
response to low hemin concentrations, but under high hemin concentrations, 
Shu1-HA4 re-localizes to the vacuolar membrane. Inactivation of abc3+, encoding 
a vacuolar membrane transporter, results in hem1Δ abc3Δ mutant cells being 
unable to grow in the presence of hemin as the sole iron source. In hem1Δ abc3Δ 
cells, ZnMP accumulates primarily in vacuoles and does not sequentially 
accumulate in the cytosol. Consistent with a role for Abc3 as vacuolar hemin 
exporter, results with hemin-agarose pulldown assays showed that Abc3 binds to 
hemin. In contrast, an Abc3 mutant in which an inverted Cys-Pro motif had been 
replaced with Ala residues fails to bind hemin with high affinity. Taken 
together, these results show that Shu1 undergoes rapid hemin-induced 
internalization from the cell surface to the vacuolar membrane and that the 
transporter Abc3 participates in the mobilization of stored heme from the 
vacuole to the cytosol.

© 2017 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M117.776807
PMCID: PMC5377804
PMID: 28193844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest with the content of this article

## Full Text

Abstract

The Schizosaccharomyces pombe shu1 + gene encodes a cell-surface protein required for assimilation of exogenous heme. In this study, shaving experiments showed that Shu1 is released from membrane preparations when spheroplast lysates are incubated with phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C (PI-PLC). Shu1 cleavability by PI-PLC and its predicted hydropathy profile strongly suggested that Shu1 is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored protein. When heme biosynthesis is selectively blocked in hem1 Δ mutant cells, the heme analog zinc mesoporphyrin IX (ZnMP) first accumulates into vacuoles and then subsequently, within the cytoplasm in a rapid and Shu1-dependent manner. An HA 4 -tagged shu1 + allele that retained wild-type function localizes to the cell surface in response to low hemin concentrations, but under high hemin concentrations, Shu1-HA 4 re-localizes to the vacuolar membrane. Inactivation of abc3 + , encoding a vacuolar membrane transporter, results in hem1 Δ abc3 Δ mutant cells being unable to grow in the presence of hemin as the sole iron source. In hem1 Δ abc3 Δ cells, ZnMP accumulates primarily in vacuoles and does not sequentially accumulate in the cytosol. Consistent with a role for Abc3 as vacuolar hemin exporter, results with hemin-agarose pulldown assays showed that Abc3 binds to hemin. In contrast, an Abc3 mutant in which an inverted Cys-Pro motif had been replaced with Ala residues fails to bind hemin with high affinity. Taken together, these results show that Shu1 undergoes rapid hemin-induced internalization from the cell surface to the vacuolar membrane and that the transporter Abc3 participates in the mobilization of stored heme from the vacuole to the cytosol.

Introduction

The transition metal ion iron is well known to serve as catalytic cofactor for many enzymes that are intimately associated with essential cellular functions ( 1 – 3 ). Iron is also required to form heme, which is a prosthetic group that is composed of a protoporphyrin ring with an iron atom at its center ( 4 ). Hemoproteins such as cytochromes, hemoglobin, and catalases are required in fundamental biochemical processes, such as respiration, oxygen transport, and disproportionation of hydrogen peroxide, respectively. As a consequence of the importance to fulfill heme requirement for growth, several organisms have evolved with different means to obtain heme ( 5 , 6 ). For instance, in the case of heme prototrophs, these organisms possess a heme biosynthetic pathway that involves eight conserved enzymes that are distributed in mitochondria and cytoplasm where their actions occur at specific steps of the biosynthetic pathway. A second strategy used by a number of organisms is to acquire heme from the environment. In these cases, molecules involved in acquisition of exogenous heme include Hrg-1 and Hrg-4 in Caenorhabditis elegans ( 7 , 8 ), Lhr1 in Leishmania amazonensis ( 9 ), Hrg-1 in Dania rerio (zebrafish) ( 7 ), and Hrg-1, Hcp1, and FLVCR2 in mammals ( 8 , 10 , 11 ). Although the heme biosynthetic pathway has been extensively studied, the cellular components that are required for acquisition of exogenous heme and their mechanisms of action are much less well understood.

In many fungal species, a conserved 8 cysteine-containing domain has been found in cell-surface-anchored proteins ( 12 , 13 ). Proteins containing this domain are members of the CFEM 3 (common in fungal extracellular membranes) family ( 12 ). The CFEM domain is unique to fungal proteins and contains the following P X C(A/G) X 2 C X 8–12 C X 1–3 ( X /T)D X 2–5 C X C X 9–14 C X 3–4 C X 15–16 C motif, where X is any amino acid residue ( 12 , 13 ). In Candida albicans , studies have shown that four CFEM proteins, Rbt5, Rbt51 (or Pga10), Pga7, and Csa2, possess the ability to bind hemin ( 14 – 16 ). Genetic analyses of different C. albicans mutant strains have revealed that only Rbt5, Pga7, and Csa2 are required for optimal assimilation of exogenous hemin. In the case of Csa2, the crystal structure of the protein has revealed that the CFEM domain adopts a novel “helical basket”-fold that consists of six α-helices ( 15 ). Based on this three-dimensional structure of a CFEM protein, disulfide bonds formed by the 8 conserved Cys residues are predicted to stabilize the helical basket-fold, which itself would serve as a flat platform in which a planar heme molecule would sit at the top of the structure. Furthermore, a long N-terminal loop of Csa2 has been suggested to cover the heme prosthetic group and stabilize its association with the platform. It is also predicted that a conserved aspartic acid residue (Asp 80 ) of the CFEM domain is exposed on the top of the platform to provide a critical contact point for heme binding ( 15 ). As a secreted hemophore-like protein, Csa2 is predicted to extract heme from hemoglobin and then behaves as carrier to deliver heme to the cell-surface-anchored CFEM proteins Rbt5 and Pga7, which are located in the cell wall and cell membrane ( 14 , 16 , 17 ).

Although Rbt5 plays an important role for C. albicans growth in the presence of hemoglobin or hemin as a sole source of iron, rbt5 Δ/Δ cells are only partially defective in hemin assimilation ( 16 ). One possible explanation is that Pga7 also participates, along with Rbt5, in hemin acquisition ( 14 ). Studies have shown that Rbt5 and Pga7 exhibit distinct properties with respect to their cell-surface attachment, namely that Rbt5 is more accessible than Pga7 at the cell surface ( 14 ). Furthermore, Rbt5 exhibits a lower affinity for hemin than Pga7. This property may explain why pga7 Δ/Δ inactivation attenuates virulence of C. albicans in a mouse model of systemic infection, although this is not the case for the loss of Rbt5 ( 14 ). According to a current model of hemin capture and uptake, Rbt5 would receive hemin from Csa2 at the cell surface and then would mediate its transfer to Pga7 through a relay pathway.

Utilization of hemin in C. albicans also depends of other cellular components, including heme oxygenase Hmx1 ( 18 , 19 ), type I-myosin Myo5, proteins of the ESCRT (endosomal sorting complex required for transport) system, and vacuolar ATPase Vma11 ( 17 ). In the case of Hmx1, it would mediate the release of iron from the iron-protoporphyrin IX ring, producing the α isomer of biliverdin. In the case of Myo5 and ESCRT complex components, their involvement in heme assimilation suggests the existence of an endocytic pathway for heme internalization and delivery to the vacuole where it may undergo proteolytic processing ( e.g. Vma11) and subsequent release into the cytoplasm ( 17 ).

Rbt5- and Pga7-like proteins are found in fungal species other than C. albicans . For instance, putative Rbt5 and Pga7 orthologs have been shown to be required for hemin assimilation in Candida parapsilosis and Paracoccidioides brasiliensis ( 20 , 21 ). In Cryptococcus neoformans , the extracellular mannoprotein Cig1 binds hemin when produced as a recombinant protein in Escherichia coli ( 22 ). C. neoformans cells lacking Cig1 consistently exhibit delayed growth when hemin is the sole source of iron ( 22 ). Although Cig1 shares a similar hydropathy profile with Rbt5 and Pga7, it is not a member of the CFEM family. In fact, Cig1 is devoid of a canonical 8 Cys-containing CFEM domain. Interestingly, some downstream cellular components of the Cig1-dependent pathway involved in hemin acquisition are common to those identified in the C. albicans Rbt5/Pga7 pathway. For instance, Vps23, a component of the C. neoformans ESCRT-I complex that is required for intracellular trafficking of endocytic vesicles, is required for hemin acquisition as it is the case in C. albicans ( 17 , 23 , 24 ).

In Schizosaccharomyces pombe , iron-regulated cell-surface Shu1 protein (226 residues) is required for assimilation of exogenous hemin ( 25 ). Analysis of its sequence reveals that the N-terminal 20 amino acid residues correspond to a putative signal peptide that targets the protein to the secretory pathway. In addition, the C-terminal portion encompassing the last 26 amino acid residues corresponds to a hydrophobic region that contains Ser 199 , which may serve as an attachment site for a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor. Although Shu1 contains 7 Cys residues, their arrangement does not correspond to that of a canonical 8 Cys-containing CFEM motif. However, 4 of these Cys residues (positions 72, 87, 92, and 101) exhibit an arrangement reminiscent of a partial CFEM motif, with a C X 14 C X 4 C X 8 C configuration in Shu1 as compared with a C X 11 C X 4 C X 15 C configuration in C. albicans Rbt5 and Pga7. Absorbance spectroscopy and hemin-agarose pulldown experiments have demonstrated that Shu1 binds to hemin ( 25 ). When iron levels are low and heme biosynthesis is selectively blocked, Shu1 localizes to the plasma membrane where it mediates acquisition of exogenous heme. Under similar conditions, shu1 Δ mutant cells in which the heme biosynthetic pathway is selectively inactivated are unable to grow in the presence of exogenous hemin as a sole source of iron ( 25 ).

In C. albicans , studies have suggested that Rbt5-mediated heme assimilation involves an endocytic mechanism that results in the delivery of heme to the vacuole ( 17 ). Studies of the yeast vacuole have shown that this organelle can serve as a storage compartment for micronutrients, including metal ions ( 26 – 28 ). In the case of redox active metal ions, vacuolar storage could prevent their accumulation to toxic levels in the cytosol. Moreover, assuming that vacuolar metal ions are present in a usable form, the vacuole represents a reservoir of metals that could be redistributed throughout the cell under metal-deficient conditions ( 29 – 34 ). In the case of S. pombe , knowledge is lacking concerning transport systems capable of extracting metal or heme from the vacuole. With respect to iron homeostasis, transcriptional analyses have revealed that the expression of the ABC-type transporter Abc3 is induced under low-iron conditions ( 35 ). Under these conditions, Abc3 localizes to the membrane vacuole where it may participate in the redistribution of stored inorganic iron or organic iron conjugates from the vacuole to the cytosol ( 35 ).

In the present report, we show that Shu1 is a membrane-bound protein that is sensitive to the action of phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C (PI-PLC). Under low hemin conditions, Shu1 localizes at the cell surface. However, in the presence of high concentrations of hemin, Shu1 undergoes internalization from the cell surface to the vacuole. Disruption of the iron-regulated vacuolar transporter abc3 + in cells lacking a functional heme biosynthetic pathway ( hem1 Δ) results in an inability of these mutant cells ( hem1 Δ abc3 Δ) to grow in the presence of hemin as a sole source of iron. Microscopic analyses of hem1 Δ abc3 Δ mutant cells in the presence of ZnMP showed that this heme analog accumulates within the cell but is restricted to vacuoles in comparison with wild-type cells in which case ZnMP successively accumulates in the vacuoles and then the cytoplasm. Analysis by hemin-agarose pulldown assays showed that Abc3 interacts with hemin. Site-directed mutagenesis identified an inverted Cys-Pro motif (residues 151–152) within a hydrophilic loop region of Abc3 that is required for its association with hemin. Collectively, these results describe novel features of the Shu1-dependent heme acquisition pathway, including the discovery of the role of Abc3 in the mobilization of vacuolar heme stores.

Discussion

Although heme is an essential prosthetic group for several proteins and can serve as a source of iron, cellular components that are required for heme assimilation and iron acquisition from heme are still poorly understood. Using the model organism S. pombe , our previous studies have identified Shu1 as a novel cell membrane protein involved in assimilation of exogenous heme ( 25 ). Shu1 is predicted to contain a GPI anchor that attaches the protein to the membrane ( 44 ). If this were the case, exposing the cell membranes to exogenous PI-PLC should release Shu1 from its anchor. Here, results showed that a PI-PLC treatment triggered the release of Shu1, suggesting removal of membrane-bound Shu1 from its GPI anchor. These results lent support to the prediction of a Shu1-associated GPI-attachment site (ω-site) corresponding to Ser 199 . In the case of Shu1, the ω-site is followed by 2 relatively short side chain amino acid residues (Ser 200 and Ala 201 ), especially in the case of ω+2 position (Ala 201 ). This motif is known to favor the addition of a GPI anchor at a Ser residue. One additional favorable feature is that the polypeptide region downstream of the ω, ω+1, and ω+2 residues of Shu1 is constituted of a putative spacer region of ∼13 amino acid residues, followed by a predicted hydrophobic tail of 12 residues. Overall, the predicted Shu1 GPI attachment site and its downstream region exhibit characteristics that are commonly found in GPI-anchored proteins.

Our previous studies have shown that shu1 + is regulated at the level of gene transcription ( 25 ). It is induced under conditions of iron starvation and turned off under iron-replete conditions. To investigate whether Shu1 underwent post-translational regulation, we studied changes in Shu1 localization in the presence of low (0.075 μ m ) and high (50 μ m ) hemin concentrations. A functional shu1 + -HA 4 allele was expressed under the control of a thiamine-sensitive nmt + promoter to address this question. Biosynthesis of Shu1-HA 4 occurred in the absence of thiamine but the addition of thiamine repressed further synthesis. We then investigated the effect of hemin on the subcellular localization of Shu1-HA 4 . When cells were treated with low concentrations of hemin, Shu1 localized at the cell surface, whereas under conditions of high concentrations of hemin, Shu1 was detected on vacuolar membrane. Consistent with these results, we observed that the activity of Shu1 led to vacuolar accumulation of ZnMP after 10 min. Subsequently, ZnMP fluorescent signal was progressively found in the cytoplasm after 30 min. These results were reminiscent of findings for C. albicans Rbt5. Using fluorescently rhodamine-tagged hemoglobin, C. albicans cells expressing Rbt5 accumulate rhodamine-tagged hemoglobin in the vacuoles and then to a lesser extent in the cytosol ( 17 ).

After it has reached the plasma membrane, Shu1 then internalized in response to heme. The mechanism of Shu1 internalization remains unclear at this point because its anchoring to the membrane by a GPI structure yields a protein that lacks a cytoplasmic domain that could be used as a target by an endocytic pathway. One possible explanation is that Shu1 is involved in lateral interactions with other plasma membrane components, which could serve as direct targets to be modified and taken up as a heteromeric plasma membrane complex in endocytic vesicles. Alternatively, there are a few reported cases of GPI-anchored proteins as in the case of the prion protein that leave plasma membrane lipid “raft” domains to enter clathrin-coated pits and then undergo endocytosis in coated vesicles ( 45 ). In the case of the prion protein, its amino-terminal domain is sufficient to trigger internalization within the cell ( 46 ). Although most cell-surface proteins appear to be internalized by dynamin-dependent pathways that include the clathrin-coated mediated pathway, a large proportion of GPI-anchored proteins are selectively internalized through a dynamin-independent pathway ( 45 , 47 ). These findings have led to the proposal that several GPI-anchored proteins are endocytosed by pinocytosis through specialized early endosomal compartments known as GEECs ( G PI-anchored protein- e nriched early e ndosomal c ompartments) ( 45 , 48 ). Because GEECs result from fusion of primary uncoated clathrin-independent vesicular carriers called CLICs (derived from the cell surface), this process is called the CLIC/GEEC pathway ( 47 ). However, the CLIC/GEEC pathway has not yet been described in fungi, including S. pombe , which makes this process of internalization speculative to explain endocytic internalization Shu1.

Although the mechanism by which heme-dependent GPI-anchored CFEM-like proteins undergo cellular internalization remains unclear, it appears that the endocytic process may involve the endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) machinery ( 49 , 50 ). The ESCRT machinery is composed of four complexes, ESCRT-0, -I, -II, and -III, and other cellular components such as the Vps4 complex ( 51 ). ESCRT complexes capture endosomal membrane proteins that are monoubiquitinated and deliver them to the multivesicular body compartment and, from there, to the vacuole (yeast) or lysosome (mammalian cell), where ubiquitinated cargos are degraded. In C. albicans , the cell-surface GPI-anchored Rbt5 and Rbt51 proteins bind hemin and hemoglobin ( 16 ). These proteins are absent in Saccharomyces cerevisiae , which is unable to take up exogenous hemin or hemoglobin. Interestingly, heterologous expression of C. albicans Rbt51 in S. cerevisiae enables acquisition and utilization of exogenous hemoglobin ( 17 ). However, S. cerevisiae mutants lacking ESCRT-II and -III components (such as Vps22 and Vps32) are defective in assimilation of exogenous hemoglobin ( 17 ). Furthermore, C. albicans ESCRT complex mutants exhibit significant growth defects in media containing hemoglobin as the sole iron source ( 17 ). Proteins of the ESCRT pathway have also been found to be required for hemin use in C. neoformans ( 23 , 24 ). In addition to ESCRT-II (Vps22) and -III (Vps20 and Vps32) components, the subunit Vps23 of the ESCRT-I complex contributes to hemin uptake ( 24 ). However, there is yet absence of evidence that Rbt5/51 and Cig1 represent ubiquitinated cargos of the C. albicans and C. neoformans ESCRT proteins, respectively. Given that the ESCRT machinery is committed to targeting of membrane proteins to the vacuole and the fact that Shu1 undergoes relocalization from the cell surface to the vacuole in response to hemin, it is likely that components of the ESCRT machinery are required for Shu1 internalization. If this were the case, then Shu1 may become ubiquitinated upon its association with hemin. However, it is far from clear how Shu1 would become ubiquitinated. In S. pombe , an alternative route for cargos to reach the ESCRT pathway is through an association with Nbr1 ( 52 , 53 ). Upon formation of a cargo-Nbr1 complex, there is ubiquitination of Nbr1 and that results in the sequestration of the cargo-Nbr1 complex inside of MBVs in a ESCRT-dependent manner. Subsequently, the cargo-Nbr1 complex is delivered to the vacuole where the proteins that are bound by Nbr1 are released into the vacuole ( 52 ).

Our results revealed that Shu1 is required for internalization of hemin or ZnMP, which is then delivered to the vacuole. Once in vacuoles, hemin (or ZnMP) may undergo further degradation, resulting in the release of iron (or zinc) from the protoporphyrin ring. This series of events would constitute a specialized pathway and make the vacuole an important site for intracellular hemin and iron stores. S. pombe is one of the yeast species that does not express homologs of S. cerevisiae vacuolar iron transporters (Smf3, Fth1, and Fet5) or heme oxygenase (Hmx1) like that found in C. albicans . Instead, we have previously shown that when S. pombe undergoes a transition from high to low iron concentrations, the vacuolar transmembrane protein Abc3 is highly induced and participates in the mobilization of stored iron sources from the vacuole ( 35 ). However, the nature of the usable form of iron that can be transported by Abc3 remains unclear. Results of pulldown assays using hemin-agarose showed that Abc3-GFP expressed in iron-starved cells was specifically retained on the beads. This observation was in agreement with the fact that Abc3 possesses an inverted CP motif that is predicted to be located at the beginning of an exposed hydrophilic linker region (denoted L0), which separates the N-terminal NTE domain of Abc3 from its ABC core domain. According to a predicted three-dimensional model by I-TASSER ( 54 ), the inverted CP motif (Pro 151 and Cys 152 ) of Abc3 is oriented toward the vacuolar side. In several hemoproteins such as FeoB ( E. coli ), IRP2 ( human ), and DP8 ( human ), the CP motif is part of a central heme-binding domain due to the presence of the Pro side chain that fosters a distinct conformation of the Cys thiol group. This property enables Cys to coordinate heme through its thiol group. Other examples of hemoproteins that include GlpF ( E. coli ) and DGCR8 ( human ) exhibit an inverted CP motif that is sufficient to confer heme binding capacity ( 42 ). Here, when the inverted CP motif (Pro 151 -Cys 152 ) was mutated in Abc3, cells expressing the abc3-P151A/C152A allele selectively accumulated the heme analog ZnMP in vacuoles and were unable to subsequently trigger its redistribution in the cytoplasm in comparison to cells expressing a wild-type abc3 + allele. Furthermore, pulldown assays using protein lysates prepared from cells expressing Abc3-P151A/C152A showed that substitutions of Pro 151 -Cys 152 residues (in Ala) strongly decreased Abc3 binding to hemin-agarose. These results suggested that the inverted CP motif (Pro 151 -Cys 152 ) participates in hemin coordination in Abc3. However, whether one residue contributes more than another or whether there is influence of additional amino acid residues flanking the motif or elsewhere will require additional studies.

Data reported here concerning Abc3 are reminiscent of those observed in the case of the human ABCG2 protein, which is an ABC transporter known to be involved in the export of heme, hemin, and ZnMP ( 38 , 55 ). Although Abc3 and ABCG2 are members of different ABC protein subfamilies, they possess a large loop that contains an inverted CP motif. In the case of ABCG2, the ECL3 loop located between transmembrane domains 5 and 6 contains an inverted CP motif (Pro 602 -Cys 603 ) ( 38 ). Studies showed that a single-point mutation C603A inside ECL3 dramatically decreases the binding of hemin to ABCG2 ( 38 ). Given the fact that results described in this report as well as previous studies ( 17 ) have implicated the vacuole as a player in heme assimilation and assuming that vacuolar heme is present in a usable form, we suggest that Abc3 is an intracellular transporter that mobilizes stores of heme from this organelle for redistribution within the cytoplasm when cells face heme/iron deprivation.
