---
pmid: '23619768'
title: Functional characterization of Upf1 targets in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
authors:
- Matia-González AM
- Hasan A
- Moe GH
- Mata J
- Rodríguez-Gabriel MA
journal: RNA Biol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3904585
doi: 10.4161/rna.24569
---

# Functional characterization of Upf1 targets in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
**Authors:** Matia-González AM, Hasan A, Moe GH, Mata J, Rodríguez-Gabriel MA
**Journal:** RNA Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.4161/rna.24569](https://doi.org/10.4161/rna.24569)
**PMC:** [PMC3904585](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3904585/)

## Abstract

1. RNA Biol. 2013 Jun;10(6):1057-65. doi: 10.4161/rna.24569. Epub 2013 Apr 16.

Functional characterization of Upf1 targets in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Matia-González AM(1), Hasan A, Moe GH, Mata J, Rodríguez-Gabriel MA.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, UAM-CSIC Madrid, Spain.

Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is a highly conserved mechanism of mRNA 
degradation. NMD eliminates mRNAs containing premature termination codons 
(PTCs), preventing the production of truncated proteins with possible 
deleterious effects. However, there is mounting evidence that NMD factors, like 
Upf1, Upf2 and Upf3, participate in general regulation of gene expression, 
affecting the expression of genes lacking PTCs. We have used the fission yeast 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe to identify mRNAs directly regulated by NMD. Using a 
combination of genetic and biochemical approaches, we have defined a population 
of fission yeast mRNAs specifically regulated by Upf1. We show that other 
components of the Upf complex, Upf2 and Upf3, are required for binding of Upf1 
to its RNA targets and for the proper response of fission yeast to oxidative 
stress. Finally, we investigated the physiological importance of this 
phenomenon, and demonstrate that the Upf1-dependent downregulation of some of 
its direct targets is necessary for normal resistance to oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.4161/rna.24569
PMCID: PMC3904585
PMID: 23619768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is a highly conserved mechanism of mRNA degradation. NMD eliminates mRNAs containing premature termination codons (PTCs), preventing the production of truncated proteins with possible deleterious effects. However, there is mounting evidence that NMD factors, like Upf1, Upf2 and Upf3, participate in general regulation of gene expression, affecting the expression of genes lacking PTCs. We have used the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe to identify mRNAs directly regulated by NMD. Using a combination of genetic and biochemical approaches, we have defined a population of fission yeast mRNAs specifically regulated by Upf1. We show that other components of the Upf complex, Upf2 and Upf3, are required for binding of Upf1 to its RNA targets and for the proper response of fission yeast to oxidative stress. Finally, we investigated the physiological importance of this phenomenon, and demonstrate that the Upf1-dependent downregulation of some of its direct targets is necessary for normal resistance to oxidative stress.

Introduction

Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) eliminates mRNAs carrying nonsense translation codons. 1 - 4 The source of those premature termination codons is varied: mutations, errors in splicing processes, DNA rearrangements during lymphocyte development, etc. NMD has been found in all eukaryotes studied so far, from yeast to human, although the specific mechanisms show some differences, 4 - 7 and modulates the expression of an important fraction of the genome in yeast, plants, fruit fly and humans. 6 , 8 - 15 There is little overlap in the functional groups regulated by NMD in different organisms, 6 , 13 although the strong conservation of NMD suggests an important role in eukaryotic cellular physiology. Consistently, NMD is essential for vertebrate embryonic viability. 16 , 17 In mammals, for example, failure to eliminate certain PTC-containing mRNAs can lead to the emergence of dominant-negative phenotypes due to the production of truncated proteins. In contrast, when those mRNAs are eliminated through NMD, the phenotypes are usually recessive. 18 Inhibition of NMD also leads to changes in general protein expression with potential uses in therapy, like tumor immunity. 19

The mechanisms underlying NMD substrate recognition and targeting, however, appear to vary in different organisms and remain an interesting research field. Thus, identification of legitimate targets of the NMD pathway should help to shed light on this issue.

Some of the proteins involved in NMD are extremely well conserved through phylogeny. This is the case for Upf1 (RENT1), Upf2 and Upf3, 2 that work as a complex. However, how this machinery recognizes its substrates and targets them to accelerated degradation remains to be clearly defined.

There is also evidence that Upf1 and other components of NMD can play important functions in the cell independently of their role in the NMD process. 20 - 24 In fact, many targets of NMD factors do not have PTCs. 8 , 25

The fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe contains Upf1 and Upf2 proteins, although the NMD mechanism is somehow different from mammals. 7 , 26 , 27 Interestingly, a deficiency in Upf1 or Upf2 leads to oxidative stress sensitivity, possibly indicating a role for NMD in this process. 27 However, the biochemical mechanism by which NMD is involved in oxidative stress protection remains elusive.

In this report, we have described for the first time the direct targets of Upf1 in Schizosaccharomyces pombe . We have also provided evidence of the link among the three Upf proteins (Upf1, Upf2 and Upf3) in the response to oxidative stress. We finally propose a mechanism of gene regulation by which Upf1 may regulate oxidative stress resistance in fission yeast.

Discussion

In this report, we systematically identified mRNAs associated with Upf1 in S. pombe and used genome-wide methods to characterize the effect of Upf1 on their abundance and stability. Although similar experiments have been performed in other organisms such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae , 9 , 25 this is the first time that such targets have been investigated in S. pomb e. The identification of biochemical targets of Upf1 proteins may shed light on the mechanisms that select mRNAs for degradation in different eukaryotes. Interestingly, the genes regulated by NMD in S. pombe are not conserved in S. cerevisiae , consistent with the lack of conservation of NMD targets in S. cerevisiae and various metazoans. 1 , 13

Our results show that Upf1 in S. pombe has an important role in regulating mRNA levels. Many of the mRNAs bound by Upf1 are directed to degradation by Upf1, as shown by their increased level and decreased half-lives in Upf1-deficient strains. Another group of mRNAs displayed increased levels in upf1 Δ mutants without clear binding to Upf1. This observation could be explained if these mRNAs are targeted for degradation in a very fast manner (so they would not remain associated with Upf1 long enough to be detected) or by indirect biochemical effects of the bona fide targets of Upf1.

A group of Upf1-bound mRNAs did not appear to be affected by the presence of Upf1. This is consistent with results reported in other organisms where Upf1 preferentially associates, but not exclusively, with NMD targets. 30 , 31 This is an intriguing result, because this binding may indicate additional functionality of Upf1 independently of the degradation of mRNAs.

We observed that many of the targets of Upf1 (bound and targeted for degradation) have features commonly found in NMD targets, like pseudogenes ( SPBPB21E7.08 ), long UTRs ( SPAC11D3.09, rad8 + ) or the presence of introns ( rex2 + ). However, other targets like SPCC63.13 , SPAC3A12.06 and mug105 + lack these features ( Table S2 ). Therefore, Upf1 might be able to target for degradation mRNAs without PTCs, as described in other systems. 6 , 9 , 12 , 13 This observation also demonstrates that fission yeast is a good model organism to dissect the different roles of Upf1 in NMD pathways and in non-NMD mechanisms. What defines a substrate for degradation and how some mRNAs bound by Upf1 escape from degradation are still open questions in the field. 32

As demonstrated in other eukaryotes like S. cerevisiae , 25 we show that Upf2 and Upf3 are essential for the correct performance of NMD in S. pombe. First, Upf1, Upf2 and Upf3 are all required for survival under oxidative stress condicions. Second, microarray analyses show that the three proteins regulate a common set of genes. Our data also shows that Upf2 regulates a smaller set of genes than Upf1 or Upf3 and, on the other hand, many genes are regulated by Upf1 or Upf3 independently of the other two proteins. This result is interesting and points to a mechanism where the three proteins share many of their biological targets, but could also have independent roles in gene expression regulation. However, it is unclear whether some of the functions of Upf1 in fission yeast can be performed in the absence of Upf2 or Upf3, as described in other systems. 20 , 21 , 23 Addressing this question will require additional experiments.

We have also uncovered a mechanism of oxidative stress resistance mediated by some Upf1 targets. This result is reminiscent of that described in S. cerevisiae , where inactivation of Upf1 leads to increased expression of the magnesium transporter Alr1 and, as a consequence, translation termination fidelity is affected. 33 We propose a somewhat similar mechanism in fission yeast, where inactivation of NMD by deletion of Upf1 would lead to increased levels of Rex2 and, as a consequence, to increased sensitivity to oxidative stress. It is still unclear by which mechanism Rex2 overexpression reduces oxidative stress resistance. Rex2 sequence homology indicates that it may have a 3′-5′ exonuclease activity, but it has not been characterized in fission yeast.

The data presented in this manuscript give insight into how the physiological functions of NMD factors are mediated by target mRNAs that lack nonsense codons, and into the importance of Upf1 in different physiological situations.
