---
pmid: '12783856'
title: Control of landmark events in meiosis by the CDK Cdc28 and the meiosis-specific
  kinase Ime2.
authors:
- Benjamin KR
- Zhang C
- Shokat KM
- Herskowitz I
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2003'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC196082
doi: 10.1101/gad.1101503
---

# Control of landmark events in meiosis by the CDK Cdc28 and the meiosis-specific kinase Ime2.
**Authors:** Benjamin KR, Zhang C, Shokat KM, Herskowitz I
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1101503](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1101503)
**PMC:** [PMC196082](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC196082/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2003 Jun 15;17(12):1524-39. doi: 10.1101/gad.1101503. Epub 2003 Jun
 3.

Control of landmark events in meiosis by the CDK Cdc28 and the meiosis-specific 
kinase Ime2.

Benjamin KR(1), Zhang C, Shokat KM, Herskowitz I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California-San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143-0448, USA. kbenjamin@molsci.org

Meiosis is thought to require the protein kinase Ime2 early for DNA replication 
and the cyclin-dependent kinase Cdc28 late for chromosome segregation. To 
elucidate the roles of these kinases, we inhibited their activities early and 
late using conditional mutants that are sensitive to chemical inhibitors. Our 
studies reveal that both Cdc28 and Ime2 have critical roles in meiotic S phase 
and M phase. Early inhibition of analog-sensitive cdc28-as1 blocked DNA 
replication, revealing a previously undetected role for Cdc28. Yet Cdc28 was 
dispensable for one of its functions in the mitotic cell cycle, degradation of 
Sic1. Late addition of inhibitor to ime2-as1 revealed unexpected roles of Ime2 
in the initiation and execution of chromosome segregation. The requirement of 
Ime2 for M phase is partially explained by its stimulation of the key meiotic 
transcription factor Ndt80, which is needed in turn for high Cdc28 activity. In 
accordance with a late role for Ime2, we observed an increase in its activity 
during M phase that depended on Cdc28 and Ndt80. We speculate that several 
unique features of the meiotic cell division reflect a division of labor and 
regulatory coordination between Ime2 and Cdc28.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1101503
PMCID: PMC196082
PMID: 12783856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Meiosis is thought to require the protein kinase Ime2 early for DNA  replication and the cyclin-dependent kinase Cdc28 late for chromosome  segregation. To elucidate the roles of these kinases, we inhibited their  activities early and late using conditional mutants that are sensitive to  chemical inhibitors. Our studies reveal that both Cdc28 and Ime2 have critical  roles in meiotic S phase and M phase. Early inhibition of analog-sensitive cdc28-as1 blocked DNA replication, revealing a previously undetected  role for Cdc28. Yet Cdc28 was dispensable for one of its functions in the  mitotic cell cycle, degradation of Sic1. Late addition of inhibitor to ime2-as1 revealed unexpected roles of Ime2 in the initiation and  execution of chromosome segregation. The requirement of Ime2 for M phase is  partially explained by its stimulation of the key meiotic transcription factor  Ndt80, which is needed in turn for high Cdc28 activity. In accordance with a  late role for Ime2, we observed an increase in its activity during M phase  that depended on Cdc28 and Ndt80. We speculate that several unique features of  the meiotic cell division reflect a division of labor and regulatory  coordination between Ime2 and Cdc28.

Discussion

Progression through meiosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae requires a  transcriptional cascade and the actions of two key kinases, Cdc28 and Ime2. We  used a chemical genetic approach to potently inhibit Cdc28 and Ime2 kinases at  various times of meiosis and thereby identify additional roles for these  kinases. Our demonstration that Cdc28 is necessary for meiotic DNA replication  and dispensable for Sic1 degradation supports the idea that Ime2 has assumed  some but not all of the functions of Cdc28 in meiotic S phase. We found that  Ime2, like Cdc28, is needed for the G2–M transition and for execution of  two sequential rounds of chromosome segregation. This late requirement for  Ime2 is partly due to its stimulation of NDT80 transcription  throughout M phase. Additional roles of Ime2 may include boosting middle gene  transcription by phosphorylation of Ndt80 or promoting functions independent  of Ndt80.
