---
pmid: '12419249'
title: BRCA1 supports XIST RNA concentration on the inactive X chromosome.
authors:
- Ganesan S
- Silver DP
- Greenberg RA
- Avni D
- Drapkin R
- Miron A
- Mok SC
- Randrianarison V
- Brodie S
- Salstrom J
- Rasmussen TP
- Klimke A
- Marrese C
- Marahrens Y
- Deng CX
- Feunteun J
- Livingston DM
journal: Cell
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)01052-8
---

# BRCA1 supports XIST RNA concentration on the inactive X chromosome.
**Authors:** Ganesan S, Silver DP, Greenberg RA, Avni D, Drapkin R, Miron A, Mok SC, Randrianarison V, Brodie S, Salstrom J, Rasmussen TP, Klimke A, Marrese C, Marahrens Y, Deng CX, Feunteun J, Livingston DM
**Journal:** Cell (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(02)01052-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(02)01052-8)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2002 Nov 1;111(3):393-405. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)01052-8.

BRCA1 supports XIST RNA concentration on the inactive X chromosome.

Ganesan S(1), Silver DP, Greenberg RA, Avni D, Drapkin R, Miron A, Mok SC, 
Randrianarison V, Brodie S, Salstrom J, Rasmussen TP, Klimke A, Marrese C, 
Marahrens Y, Deng CX, Feunteun J, Livingston DM.

Author information:
(1)The Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA.

BRCA1, a breast and ovarian tumor suppressor, colocalizes with markers of the 
inactive X chromosome (Xi) on Xi in female somatic cells and associates with 
XIST RNA, as detected by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Breast and ovarian 
carcinoma cells lacking BRCA1 show evidence of defects in Xi chromatin 
structure. Reconstitution of BRCA1-deficient cells with wt BRCA1 led to the 
appearance of focal XIST RNA staining without altering XIST abundance. 
Inhibiting BRCA1 synthesis in a suitable reporter line led to increased 
expression of an otherwise silenced Xi-located GFP transgene. These observations 
suggest that loss of BRCA1 in female cells may lead to Xi perturbation and 
destabilization of its silenced state.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)01052-8
PMID: 12419249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
