---
pmid: '14704431'
title: A map of the interactome network of the metazoan C. elegans.
authors:
- Li S
- Armstrong CM
- Bertin N
- Ge H
- Milstein S
- Boxem M
- Vidalain PO
- Han JD
- Chesneau A
- Hao T
- Goldberg DS
- Li N
- Martinez M
- Rual JF
- Lamesch P
- Xu L
- Tewari M
- Wong SL
- Zhang LV
- Berriz GF
- Jacotot L
- Vaglio P
- Reboul J
- Hirozane-Kishikawa T
- Li Q
- Gabel HW
- Elewa A
- Baumgartner B
- Rose DJ
- Yu H
- Bosak S
- Sequerra R
- Fraser A
- Mango SE
- Saxton WM
- Strome S
- Van Den Heuvel S
- Piano F
- Vandenhaute J
- Sardet C
- Gerstein M
- Doucette-Stamm L
- Gunsalus KC
- Harper JW
- Cusick ME
- Roth FP
- Hill DE
- Vidal M
journal: Science
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1698949
doi: 10.1126/science.1091403
---

# A map of the interactome network of the metazoan C. elegans.
**Authors:** Li S, Armstrong CM, Bertin N, Ge H, Milstein S, Boxem M, Vidalain PO, Han JD, Chesneau A, Hao T, Goldberg DS, Li N, Martinez M, Rual JF, Lamesch P, Xu L, Tewari M, Wong SL, Zhang LV, Berriz GF, Jacotot L, Vaglio P, Reboul J, Hirozane-Kishikawa T, Li Q, Gabel HW, Elewa A, Baumgartner B, Rose DJ, Yu H, Bosak S, Sequerra R, Fraser A, Mango SE, Saxton WM, Strome S, Van Den Heuvel S, Piano F, Vandenhaute J, Sardet C, Gerstein M, Doucette-Stamm L, Gunsalus KC, Harper JW, Cusick ME, Roth FP, Hill DE, Vidal M
**Journal:** Science (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1091403](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1091403)
**PMC:** [PMC1698949](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1698949/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2004 Jan 23;303(5657):540-3. doi: 10.1126/science.1091403. Epub 2004 
Jan 2.

A map of the interactome network of the metazoan C. elegans.

Li S(1), Armstrong CM, Bertin N, Ge H, Milstein S, Boxem M, Vidalain PO, Han JD, 
Chesneau A, Hao T, Goldberg DS, Li N, Martinez M, Rual JF, Lamesch P, Xu L, 
Tewari M, Wong SL, Zhang LV, Berriz GF, Jacotot L, Vaglio P, Reboul J, 
Hirozane-Kishikawa T, Li Q, Gabel HW, Elewa A, Baumgartner B, Rose DJ, Yu H, 
Bosak S, Sequerra R, Fraser A, Mango SE, Saxton WM, Strome S, Van Den Heuvel S, 
Piano F, Vandenhaute J, Sardet C, Gerstein M, Doucette-Stamm L, Gunsalus KC, 
Harper JW, Cusick ME, Roth FP, Hill DE, Vidal M.

Author information:
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical 
School, 44 Binney Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

To initiate studies on how protein-protein interaction (or "interactome") 
networks relate to multicellular functions, we have mapped a large fraction of 
the Caenorhabditis elegans interactome network. Starting with a subset of 
metazoan-specific proteins, more than 4000 interactions were identified from 
high-throughput, yeast two-hybrid (HT=Y2H) screens. Independent coaffinity 
purification assays experimentally validated the overall quality of this Y2H 
data set. Together with already described Y2H interactions and interologs 
predicted in silico, the current version of the Worm Interactome (WI5) map 
contains approximately 5500 interactions. Topological and biological features of 
this interactome network, as well as its integration with phenome and 
transcriptome data sets, lead to numerous biological hypotheses.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1091403
PMCID: PMC1698949
PMID: 14704431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

To initiate studies on how protein-protein interaction (or “interactome”) networks relate to multicellular functions, we have mapped a large fraction of the Caenorhabditis elegans interactome network. Starting with a subset of metazoan-specific proteins, more than 4000 interactions were identified from high-throughput, yeast two-hybrid (HT=Y2H) screens. Independent coaffinity purification assays experimentally validated the overall quality of this Y2H data set. Together with already described Y2H interactions and interologs predicted in silico , the current version of the Worm Interactome (WI5) map contains ∼5500 interactions. Topological and biological features of this interactome network, as well as its integration with phenome and transcriptome data sets, lead to numerous biological hypotheses.
