---
pmid: '25852190'
title: Integrative analysis of kinase networks in TRAIL-induced apoptosis provides
  a source of potential targets for combination therapy.
authors:
- So J
- Pasculescu A
- Dai AY
- Williton K
- James A
- Nguyen V
- Creixell P
- Schoof EM
- Sinclair J
- Barrios-Rodiles M
- Gu J
- Krizus A
- Williams R
- Olhovsky M
- Dennis JW
- Wrana JL
- Linding R
- Jorgensen C
- Pawson T
- Colwill K
journal: Sci Signal
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2005700
---

# Integrative analysis of kinase networks in TRAIL-induced apoptosis provides a source of potential targets for combination therapy.
**Authors:** So J, Pasculescu A, Dai AY, Williton K, James A, Nguyen V, Creixell P, Schoof EM, Sinclair J, Barrios-Rodiles M, Gu J, Krizus A, Williams R, Olhovsky M, Dennis JW, Wrana JL, Linding R, Jorgensen C, Pawson T, Colwill K
**Journal:** Sci Signal (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scisignal.2005700](https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.2005700)

## Abstract

1. Sci Signal. 2015 Apr 7;8(371):rs3. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2005700.

Integrative analysis of kinase networks in TRAIL-induced apoptosis provides a 
source of potential targets for combination therapy.

So J(1), Pasculescu A(2), Dai AY(2), Williton K(2), James A(2), Nguyen V(2), 
Creixell P(3), Schoof EM(3), Sinclair J(4), Barrios-Rodiles M(2), Gu J(2), 
Krizus A(2), Williams R(2), Olhovsky M(2), Dennis JW(5), Wrana JL(5), Linding 
R(6), Jorgensen C(7), Pawson T(8), Colwill K(9).

Author information:
(1)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, 
Ontario M5G 1X5, Canada. Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada.
(2)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, 
Ontario M5G 1X5, Canada.
(3)Cellular Signal Integration Group (C-SIG), Technical University of Denmark 
(DTU), DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark.
(4)Cell Communication Team, The Institute of Cancer Research, London SW3 6JB, 
UK.
(5)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, 
Ontario M5G 1X5, Canada. Department of Molecular Genetics, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada.
(6)Cellular Signal Integration Group (C-SIG), Technical University of Denmark 
(DTU), DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark. Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), 
University of Copenhagen (UCPH), DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark. 
linding@lindinglab.org claus.jorgensen@cruk.manchester.ac.uk 
colwill@lunenfeld.ca.
(7)Cell Communication Team, The Institute of Cancer Research, London SW3 6JB, 
UK. linding@lindinglab.org claus.jorgensen@cruk.manchester.ac.uk 
colwill@lunenfeld.ca.
(8)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, 
Ontario M5G 1X5, Canada. Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada. Department of Molecular Genetics, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada.
(9)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, 
Ontario M5G 1X5, Canada. linding@lindinglab.org 
claus.jorgensen@cruk.manchester.ac.uk colwill@lunenfeld.ca.

Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is an endogenous 
secreted peptide and, in preclinical studies, preferentially induces apoptosis 
in tumor cells rather than in normal cells. The acquisition of resistance in 
cells exposed to TRAIL or its mimics limits their clinical efficacy. Because 
kinases are intimately involved in the regulation of apoptosis, we 
systematically characterized kinases involved in TRAIL signaling. Using RNA 
interference (RNAi) loss-of-function and cDNA overexpression screens, we 
identified 169 protein kinases that influenced the dynamics of TRAIL-induced 
apoptosis in the colon adenocarcinoma cell line DLD-1. We classified the kinases 
as sensitizers or resistors or modulators, depending on the effect that 
knockdown and overexpression had on TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Two of these 
kinases that were classified as resistors were PX domain-containing 
serine/threonine kinase (PXK) and AP2-associated kinase 1 (AAK1), which promote 
receptor endocytosis and may enable cells to resist TRAIL-induced apoptosis by 
enhancing endocytosis of the TRAIL receptors. We assembled protein interaction 
maps using mass spectrometry-based protein interaction analysis and quantitative 
phosphoproteomics. With these protein interaction maps, we modeled information 
flow through the networks and identified apoptosis-modifying kinases that are 
highly connected to regulated substrates downstream of TRAIL. The results of 
this analysis provide a resource of potential targets for the development of 
TRAIL combination therapies to selectively kill cancer cells.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.2005700
PMID: 25852190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
