---
pmid: '21673012'
title: KIAA0101 interacts with BRCA1 and regulates centrosome number.
authors:
- Kais Z
- Barsky SH
- Mathsyaraja H
- Zha A
- Ransburgh DJ
- He G
- Pilarski RT
- Shapiro CL
- Huang K
- Parvin JD
journal: Mol Cancer Res
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC3157549
doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0503
---

# KIAA0101 interacts with BRCA1 and regulates centrosome number.
**Authors:** Kais Z, Barsky SH, Mathsyaraja H, Zha A, Ransburgh DJ, He G, Pilarski RT, Shapiro CL, Huang K, Parvin JD
**Journal:** Mol Cancer Res (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0503](https://doi.org/10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0503)
**PMC:** [PMC3157549](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3157549/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 Aug;9(8):1091-9. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0503. Epub
 2011 Jun 14.

KIAA0101 interacts with BRCA1 and regulates centrosome number.

Kais Z(1), Barsky SH, Mathsyaraja H, Zha A, Ransburgh DJ, He G, Pilarski RT, 
Shapiro CL, Huang K, Parvin JD.

Author information:
(1)Molecular, Cellular, and Development Program, Ohio State University, 
Columbus, OH, USA.

To find genes and proteins that collaborate with BRCA1 or BRCA2 in the 
pathogenesis of breast cancer, we used an informatics approach and found a 
candidate BRCA interactor, KIAA0101, to function like BRCA1 in exerting a 
powerful control over centrosome number. The effect of KIAA0101 on centrosomes 
is likely direct, as its depletion does not affect the cell cycle, KIAA0101 
localizes to regions coincident with the centrosomes, and KIAA0101 binds to 
BRCA1. We analyzed whether KIAA0101 protein is overexpressed in breast cancer 
tumor samples in tissue microarrays, and we found that overexpression of 
KIAA0101 correlated with positive Ki67 staining, a biomarker associated with 
increased disease severity. Furthermore, overexpression of the KIAA0101 gene in 
breast tumors was found to be associated with significantly decreased survival 
time. This study identifies KIAA0101 as a protein important for breast 
tumorigenesis, and as this factor has been reported as a UV repair factor, it 
may link the UV damage response to centrosome control.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0503
PMCID: PMC3157549
PMID: 21673012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: The authors report no 
conflicts of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

To find genes and proteins that collaborate with BRCA1 or BRCA2 in the pathogenesis of breast cancer, we used an informatics approach and found a candidate BRCA interactor, KIAA0101, to function like BRCA1 in exerting a powerful control over centrosome number. The effect of KIAA0101 on centrosomes is likely direct since its depletion does not affect the cell cycle, KIAA0101 localizes to regions coincident with the centrosomes, and KIAA0101 binds to BRCA1. We analyzed whether KIAA0101 protein is overexpressed in breast cancer tumor samples in tissue microarrays, and we found that overexpression of KIAA0101 correlated with positive Ki67 staining, a biomarker associated with increased disease severity. Further, overexpression of the KIAA0101 gene in breast tumors was found to be associated with significantly decreased survival time. This study identifies KIAA0101 as a protein important for breast tumorigenesis, and since this factor has been reported as a UV repair factor, it may link the UV damage response to centrosome control.

Introduction

Breast cancer, one of the most common malignancies affecting women worldwide, is attributable in about 40% of familial breast cancer cases to mutations in either one of the known breast cancer associated genes, BRCA1 or BRCA2 ( 1 , 2 ). The search for other “BRCA” genes has not identified any new candidate gene, though there are families with breast cancer predisposition and no known mutation of either BRCA1 or BRCA2 ( 3 , 4 ). It is possible that the remaining familial cases of breast cancer are due to gene mutations that have low penetrance for the breast cancer phenotype, and this low penetrance would complicate their discovery. We hypothesize that potential protein-protein interactions inferred from gene expression data can reveal genes/proteins that interact with either BRCA1 or BRCA2 in their biological functions, and these may be important markers for breast cancer.

Previous work to identify BRCA1-interacting proteins from gene expression data has utilized a network modeling strategy in order to identify genes that are potentially associated with breast cancer ( 5 ). In that study, microarray results from a single large microarray dataset were used to find genes that had mRNA levels that correlated with BRCA1 , BRCA2 , ATM , and CHK2 in all of the samples. Results identified 164 genes that were candidate BRCA1 and BRCA2 interacting proteins. In order to focus on specific candidates from among these 164 genes, omic data sets were used to rank individual genes/proteins in the BRCA centered network. One gene/protein identified in the generated network was HMMR, and experimental results revealed functional associations with BRCA1 that were previously unknown. Specific SNPs in the HMMR locus were shown to be associated with an increased risk for breast cancer in specific populations of humans. Thus, the network modeling strategy was effective and showed that it can be used in discovering new cancer-associated genes and generating functional interactions between its components ( 5 ).

Depletion of BRCA1 in mammary-derived cells in tissue culture results in centrosome amplification ( 6 ), a phenotype that is commonly seen in early stage human tumors including breast tumors ( 7 , 8 ). Centrosomes are non-membranous organelles that are essential in establishing bipolar spindles in mitotic cells, and thus are important for the control of proper chromosome segregation into daughter cells ( 9 ). Normally, centrosome duplication happens only once during the cell cycle in coordination with the replicating DNA. Having exactly two centrosomes in dividing cells is crucial for the formation of bipolar spindles and thus for the appropriate segregation of chromosomes into progeny cells. BRCA1 regulates centrosome duplication through its E3 ubiquitin ligase activity where it ubiquitinates gamma tubulin (a centrosomal protein) and thereby prevents centrosome reduplication within the same cell cycle ( 6 , 10 , 11 ). HMMR was identified to be functionally and physically associated with BRCA1. HMMR depletion resulted in centrosome amplification, the same phenotype that was seen with the depletion of BRCA1 ( 5 ). Finding new genes that collaborate with BRCA1 in this phenotype is thus important because it will eventually lead to the identification of genes that might contribute to the pathogenesis of breast cancer.

In this study, we utilize a similar informatics strategy, using multiple publicly available microarray datasets, to find genes/proteins that have high correlation with the mRNA levels of BRCA1 , BRCA2 , and HMMR . We further screen the candidate interactor for relevance to breast cancer using an on-line resource (Oncomine) to identify changes in gene expression in tumor samples ( 12 ). For the proteins that pass these two filters, we test whether they interact with BRCA1 regulated biological processes using tissue culture based functional assays. In this coexpression analysis, KIAA0101 was one of the genes that had consistently high coexpression levels with the reference genes, and Oncomine analysis revealed its association with increased metastasis and higher cancer grade. Analysis of the KIAA0101 protein in cells revealed that its concentration must be precisely controlled for the regulation of centrosomes since either depletion or overexpression of the protein results in the disruption of centrosome duplication control. Our results indicate that the concentration of the KIAA0101 protein must be finely modulated, and in many breast tumors with aggressive phenotype we detected that this protein is overexpressed. In addition, KIAA0101 overexpression correlated with lower breast cancer patient survival rates. Controlling centrosome number is a major regulatory step in the prevention of genomic instability, and by being correlated with increased tumor aggressiveness and poor patient survival rates, KIAA0101 stands out as a promising biomarker for breast cancer.

Results

We followed a strategy based on the observations that genes that function together tend to have similar expression patterns ( 17 – 19 ) revealing functional modules ( 20 ). We applied coexpression analysis to datasets deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus database ( 21 ) to initiate our search for genes that are likely to be co-expressed with the reference genes: BRCA1 , BRCA2 , and HMMR . BRCA1 and BRCA2 are established as highly penetrant tumor suppressors for breast cancer, and HMMR was previously identified as associated with BRCA1 in the control of centrosome function ( 5 ). We hypothesized that by using this approach ( Figure 1A ) we could discover new genes and fill the gaps in the BRCA pathway. In this co-expression analysis, the gene KIAA0101 consistently revealed high levels of correlation with BRCA1 , BRCA2 , and HMMR in multiple datasets and was thus identified as a candidate BRCA interactor ( Figure 1B ). Oncomine analysis showed that its expression level correlates with severity of the breast tumor ( Supp. Figure S1 ). Though published data on KIAA0101 was low, a regulatory circuit was identified that links BRCA1 , BRCA2 , and HMMR to KIAA0101 ( Figure 1C ). At the time we began the work on this study, there were very few published studies on KIAA0101 . In two publications, KIAA0101 was observed among a number of genes whose expression was elevated in cancer ( 22 , 23 ). In addition, one study renamed this protein p15(PAF), since it associated with the DNA repair factor, PCNA ( 24 ). A recent finding revealed that KIAA0101/p15(PAF) protein is important in the response to DNA damage caused by UV irradiation ( 25 ). Given that the analysis revealed this protein to have its mRNA expression highly correlated with the BRCAs, we evaluated this protein in the context of BRCA1-dependent processes in control of homologous recombination and in centrosome duplication.

Discussion

In this study, we discovered: 1.) KIAA0101 is a potential BRCA1-interactor; 2.) KIAA0101 protein concentrations are critical to appropriate control of centrosome duplication; 3.) KIAA0101 protein is a cell cycle regulated protein most abundant during S and G2 phases; 4.) depletion of KIAA0101 does not affect passage through the cell cycle; 5.) KIAA0101 localizes in the cell to the centrosome and to a perinuclear position that contains the centrosomes; 6.) KIAA0101 is in complex with BRCA1 protein; 7.) KIAA0101 is overexpressed in Ki67-positive breast cancer tumors and its overexpression is loosely correlated with TNBC; and 8.) KIAA0101 overexpression in breast tumors results in lower survival rates than the low expressing tumors.

Depletion of KIAA0101 resulted in significant centrosome amplification, a phenotype associated with BRCA1 depletion in breast cancer cell lines. Interestingly, KIAA0101 overexpression also resulted in the same phenotype suggesting that the concentration of KIAA0101 must be precisely balanced for the regulation of centrosome duplication. Because both depletion and overexpression of KIAA0101 resulted in centrosome amplification, it is possible that KIAA0101 participates in two mechanisms that control centrosome number. One mechanism would be sensitive to KIAA0101 depletion, and one mechanism sensitive to KIAA0101 overexpression. Further work is targeted at identifying these mechanistic causes of centrosome amplification secondary to changes in KIAA0101 protein levels. In two separate papers on hepatocellular carcinoma, upregulation ( 23 ) or downregulation ( 32 ) of KIAA0101 correlated with the development of the disease. Thus, our observation of precise KIAA0101 concentration control being critical for regulation of centrosomes is consistent with observations that either high or low concentrations of this protein are associated with hepatic cancers. KIAA0101 levels increased in S and G2 phases of the cell cycle, a time when KIAA0101 could, like BRCA1 ( 10 , 11 ), block over-duplication of centrosomes. Since KIAA0101 depletion did not affect cell cycle progression, and since KIAA0101 localized to centrosomes, our results are consistent with a direct role of KIAA0101 protein in regulating this organelle.

KIAA0101 protein had previously been identified as a factor associated with PCNA and important in the repair of UV-damaged DNA ( 25 ). The association with PCNA led to the anticipation that KIAA0101 would stimulate homologous recombination, and it was thus surprising that KIAA0101 depletion had no effect on this DNA repair process. Many DNA repair proteins also affect centrosome biology ( 33 – 38 ), and clearly KIAA0101 protein levels are critical for controlling centrosome number. However, like BRCA1, most of the DNA repair proteins that are involved in the regulation of centrosome number are known to be involved in the repair of DNA double strand breaks, but KIAA0101 is different in that it is a UV-specific repair factor that connects this repair pathway to the centrosome.

Is KIAA0101 a tumor suppressor? Since KIAA0101 depletion causes centrosome amplification (this study), and since KIAA0101 is important in the UV-damage response ( 25 ), it is possible that KIAA0101 is a tumor suppressor. However, it was its overexpression that was observed in a significant number of breast tumors, suggesting that it could be an oncogene. Further work is needed to determine the effects on cell growth and transformation of KIAA0101 depletion or overexpression.

Analysis of breast cancer tumors in tissue microarrays showed KIAA0101 to be overexpressed in about 45% of breast cancer tumors, and it revealed a correlation between KIAA0101 and Ki67, a proliferation marker, suggesting an association between overexpression of KIAA0101 and increased chances of relapse and worse survival rate. These results of overexpression of KIAA0101 in Ki67-positive tumors are consistent with the Oncomine analysis that linked KIAA0101 mRNA levels with high grade tumors. The utility of KIAA0101 as a protein biomarker for breast cancer is, however, currently unclear. KIAA0101 overexpression tended to be more common in ER-negative and triple negative tumors, but the trend had borderline significance. Rather, KIAA0101 overexpression appears to be an independent marker from the current breast cancer classifiers. Thus, KIAA0101 positive IHC may prove to be an important tool for the prediction of prognosis in early breast cancers that might eventually help guide the therapy of patients suffering from the invasive and aggressive form of the disease. Current work is aimed at analyzing more tissue microarrays with matched patient outcome data in order to find how KIAA0101 IHC can contribute to prognostication or to prediction of outcome for breast cancer patients.
