---
pmid: '22726440'
title: p53 opens the mitochondrial permeability transition pore to trigger necrosis.
authors:
- Vaseva AV
- Marchenko ND
- Ji K
- Tsirka SE
- Holzmann S
- Moll UM
journal: Cell
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC3383624
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.05.014
---

# p53 opens the mitochondrial permeability transition pore to trigger necrosis.
**Authors:** Vaseva AV, Marchenko ND, Ji K, Tsirka SE, Holzmann S, Moll UM
**Journal:** Cell (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2012.05.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2012.05.014)
**PMC:** [PMC3383624](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3383624/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2012 Jun 22;149(7):1536-48. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.05.014.

p53 opens the mitochondrial permeability transition pore to trigger necrosis.

Vaseva AV(1), Marchenko ND, Ji K, Tsirka SE, Holzmann S, Moll UM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jul 11;13(8):480-1. doi: 10.1038/nrm3401.
    Circ Res. 2012 Oct 26;111(10):1258-60. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.112.280990.

Ischemia-associated oxidative damage leading to necrosis is a major cause of 
catastrophic tissue loss, and elucidating its signaling mechanism is therefore 
of paramount importance. p53 is a central stress sensor responding to multiple 
insults, including oxidative stress to orchestrate apoptotic and autophagic cell 
death. Whether p53 can also activate oxidative stress-induced necrosis is, 
however, unknown. Here, we uncover a role for p53 in activating necrosis. In 
response to oxidative stress, p53 accumulates in the mitochondrial matrix and 
triggers mitochondrial permeability transition pore (PTP) opening and necrosis 
by physical interaction with the PTP regulator cyclophilin D (CypD). 
Intriguingly, a robust p53-CypD complex forms during brain ischemia/reperfusion 
injury. In contrast, reduction of p53 levels or cyclosporine A pretreatment of 
mice prevents this complex and is associated with effective stroke protection. 
Our study identifies the mitochondrial p53-CypD axis as an important contributor 
to oxidative stress-induced necrosis and implicates this axis in stroke 
pathology.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.05.014
PMCID: PMC3383624
PMID: 22726440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

Three morphologically distinct types of cell death occur in physiologic and pathologic processes: apoptosis, autophagy and necrosis ( Edinger and Thompson, 2004 ). p53 is a critical transcriptional activator and exerts additional biochemical functions in the cytoplasm. In its central role as cellular stress sensor that responds to a myriad of signals including DNA damage, oxidative stress and ischemia, p53 controls programs of apoptosis via transcription-dependent and -independent mechanisms to limit the propagation of damaged cells. p53-controlled apoptosis involves transcriptional induction of components of the death receptor and mitochondrial pathways including CD95, Puma, Noxa, Bax and others, which cooperatively promote cell death ( Brady et al., 2011 ; Riley et al., 2008 ). In addition, p53 protein can directly promote mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization (MOMP) to trigger apoptosis by modulating the MOMP governing Bcl-2 family ( Green and Kroemer, 2009 ; Vaseva and Moll, 2009 ). We and others previously identified a p53-protein based mitochondrial apoptosis program. Upon stress, a cytoplasmic pool of p53 rapidly translocates to the mitochondrial surface, where it physically interacts with both anti- and pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members to inhibit or activate their respective functions, leading to MOMP and apoptosis. In this role, p53 acts like a BH3-only protein, either as direct activator of the Bax/Bak effectors, or as sensitizer/de-repressor of Bcl-xL/2 and Mcl1 ( Vaseva and Moll, 2009 ). While in principle the pro-apoptotic effects of cytoplasmic p53 are not dependent on transcription by nuclear p53, the latter appears to enhance the function of cytoplasmic p53.

p53 also has a complex role in regulating autophagy which can promote either cell survival under stress or cell death, dependent on context. Activated nuclear p53 can transcriptionally induce AMPK and sestrin1/2 with subsequent mTOR inhibition and autophagy. Autophagy can promote cell death when apoptosis is compromised, or act as reinforcement of apoptotic caspase signaling. The overlap between apoptosis and autophagy in p53-activated cell death is illustrated by the p53 target genes DRAM, Bax and Puma, also shown to be positive autophagy regulators. Conversely, basal levels of p53 in the cytoplasm can directly inhibit autophagosomes ( Vousden and Ryan, 2009 ).

Necrosis is the irreversible tissue destruction due to bioenergetic failure, and central to ischemia/reperfusion injury and oxidative damage as occurs in cerebral stroke and myocardial infarction. The fundamental difference to apoptosis is the rapid loss of cellular membrane potentials due to energy depletion and ion pump/channel failures, leading to swelling, rupture and cytolysis. Mediators of necrosis are excess cytosolic Ca2+ and ROS levels. Rather than being a passive event, necrosis has emerged as a controlled cell death that induces an inflammatory response to stimulate tissue repair by selectively releasing factors like HMGB1 and HDGF from dying cells ( Zong and Thompson, 2006 ). Necrosis in ischemic tissues, which is experimentally modeled by H 2 O 2 treatment of cultured cells, depends on Cyclophilin D (CypD), the key regulator of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (PTP) at the inner membrane whose opening leads to cell death ( Halestrap, 2006 ). As shown by 4 independent strains, CypD−/− mice are resistant to ischemia-induced necrosis in myocardial infarction and stroke, and CypD-deficient mitochondria and cells are resistant to Ca 2+ and H 2 O 2 -induced cell death. But notably, they remain sensitive to Bcl-2-family driven apoptosis, emphasizing the two functionally distinct mitochondrial death systems ( Baines et al., 2005 ; Basso et al., 2005 ; Nakagawa et al., 2005 ; Schinzel et al., 2005 ). PTP is a regulated non-selective water- and solute-passing protein channel spanning the inner (IMM) and outer (OMM) mitochondrial membranes at points of contact. The identity of the actual pore-forming proteins of PTP are still debated, since they appear in part dispensable ( Baines, 2010 ) but can encompass VDAC (Voltage Dependent Anion Channel) across the OMM, and ANT (Adenine Nucleotide Translocase) across the IMM. In contrast, the prolyl isomerase CypD in the mitochondrial matrix is the essential regulator of the PTP pore opening, and the only genetically proven indispensable PTP component ( Kroemer et al., 2007 ).

H+ pumping out of the matrix creates the proton gradient ΔΨm across the IMM necessary to maintain mitochondrial respiration and ATP production. In unstressed cells, PTP is closed and the IMM impermeable to ions. Upon oxidative stress, sudden PTP opening causes massive ion influx that dissipates ΔΨm and shuts down oxidative phosphorylation and ATP production. This is called mitochondrial permeability transition (mPT). Concomitantly, water influx causes matrix swelling, rupture of the rigid OMM and release of all sequestered cell death factors. mPT is triggered by mitochondrial matrix sequestration of high levels of cytosolic Ca 2+ and ROS generated during oxidative damage. Clinically, CypD-triggered PTP opening and mPT is the driving pathophysiological force behind cerebral stroke, myocardial infarction and other vascular catastrophies that are leading causes of death. How CypD becomes activated to induce mPT remains unclear but depends on its prolyl isomerase activity. Cyclosporine A (CsA) potently and specifically prevents mPT by binding to CypD, inhibiting its isomerase activity and displacing it from the PTP ( Kroemer et al., 2007 ).

It is currently unknown whether p53 can also activate oxidative stress-induced necrosis. Intriguingly, our findings provide genetic, biochemical and pharmacological evidence that fundamentally expands our understanding of p53-mediated cell death networks into necrosis. We identify an unexpected critical role of stress-accumulated mitochondrial p53 protein in directly regulating PTP at the inner membrane. Upon oxidative stress, p53 triggers PTP opening by engaging in a physical interaction with CypD, thereby inducing necrotic cell death in mouse and human cells. Importantly, this pathway is implicated in brain ischemia-reperfusion injury.

Discussion

Here we identify a new role of p53 in activating necrotic cell death. In response to oxidative stress and ischemia, p53 protein accumulates in the mitochondrial matrix and triggers PTP opening, mPT and necrosis by physical interaction with the critical PTP regulator CypD. This p53 action is transcription-independent and inhibited by the specific CypD inhibitor CsA, and by genetic CypD deletion or knockdown. In support, in contrast to the prototypical MOMP-inducer tBid, purified p53 protein has efficacy that goes beyond activating the Bax/Bak lipid pore at the outer membrane. p53 is able to also rapidly open the PTP pore at the inner membrane in healthy Bax−/−Bak−/− mitochondria where tBid fails. Similarly, p53 causes structural alterations of the PTP pore, while tBid does not. Using gene knockout and knockdown in mouse and human cells, we show that oxidative stress induces PTP opening, mPT and necrosis that concomitantly depend on the presence of p53 and CypD. Importantly, WT, Bax/Bak DKO and p53−/− cells are all (further) sensitized to H 2 O 2 -induced PTP opening and necrotic death upon direct delivery of p53 into the mitochondrial matrix. This sensitivity is reversed by knockdown of CypD, confirming the physiological p53-CypD cross-talk. Most intriguingly, a robust p53-CypD complex is formed during necrosis in brain tissue upon ischemia/reperfusion stroke injury. In contrast, genetic reduction of p53 levels (p53+/− mice) or CsA-pretreatment of WT mice prevents this complex from forming, and is associated with effective stroke protection. This strongly supports a pathophysiologic role of the mitochondrial p53-CypD axis in ischemic stroke.

Aside from p53, very few extramitochondrial proteins are known to bind CypD and trigger pathologic PTP opening. A compelling analogy to p53, albeit acting chronically, is the highly toxic, soluble intracellular form of β amyloid peptide (Aβ), a key protein in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) that progressively accumulates in brain mitochondria of AD patients and AD transgenic mice. In AD, Aβ forms a critical complex with CypD that promotes PTP opening, thereby boosting Ca 2+ -induced mitochondrial damage and neuronal injury. Inhibiting PTP or ablating CypD in AD mice renders their cortical brain mitochondria resistant to PTP opening and improves their cognitive functions ( Du et al., 2008 ).

In response to many insults, a continuum of apoptosis and necrosis exists. Such insults induce apoptosis at lower doses and necrosis at higher doses, a scenario that is clearly the case in ischemic brain infarction with an apoptotic penumbra surrounding a necrotic center ( Zong and Thompson, 2006 ). The long-standing paradigm had been that p53 controls apoptosis but plays no role in necrosis. Only recently the very first link between p53 and necrosis was reported. Upon etoposide-mediated DNA damage Bax/Bak DKO MEFs die via slow necrosis, which is largely controlled by p53-mediated transcription of cathepsin Q in cooperation with DNA damage-induced ROS ( Tu et al., 2009 ). Interestingly, however, this transcriptional p53-cathepsin Q axis only plays a minor role in the corresponding WT MEF necrosis. In contrast, H 2 O 2 -induced necrosis in DKO MEFs was found to be completely transcription-independent ( Tu et al., 2009 ), supporting our finding of direct CypD-mediated necrotic signaling by p53. Thus, in response to oxidative stress our data establish a necrotic mitochondrial p53 program, in addition to the well-characterized mitochondrion-based apoptotic p53 program. The decision whether to engage one and/or the other appears to depend on the type and dose of stress. Clearly though, necrotic signaling also uses p53-independent pathways, depending on the insult. Examples are necrosis induced by DNA alkylating agents which signals through PARP and necrosis signaling via the TNFR/RIP1 pathway ( Zong and Thompson, 2006 ).

In oxidative damage, our data shows that p53 can control a CypD-mediated necrotic program in various cell types in vitro and in brain tissue in vivo . The surprisingly strong brain protection of p53+/− mice from ischemia/reperfusion injury ( Figures 7A, B ) is likely due to two components: The absence of a destructive p53-CypD complex, thereby protecting the PTP pore ( Figure 7C ), and the presence of an only weak p53 apoptosis program such as e.g. Puma and Noxa ( Figure S7A ). Importantly though, the absence of the p53-CypD complex appears to be the dominant factor in stroke protection. This is indicated by CsA-protected WT brains that do not form the p53-CypD complex, yet concomitantly mount a full-blown p53 apoptosis program including Puma and Noxa ( Figure S7A ). Conversely, p53−/− MEFs but not PUMA−/− MEFs are protected from oxidative stress-induced cell death, confirming that Puma does not play a significant role in this process ( Figure S7B ). Parenthetically, the p53 homolog p73, which is robustly expressed in adult mouse and human brain, was not induced in the ischemic brain tissues ( Figure S7C ). Finally, although low or uninduced levels of p53 can clearly mount a transcriptional anti-oxidant defense by regulating expression of e.g. sestrins, glutathione peroxidase and TIGAR, this is highly tissue-specific. Notably, in brain tissue p53 is constitutively pro-oxidant in both physiologic and pathologic conditions due to transcriptional repression of antioxidant genes ( Chatoo et al., 2009 ). Thus, a protective p53 anti-oxidant program is likely not a factor in the observed p53+/− stroke protection. Interestingly, for reasons that are currently not clear, p53−/− brains were not as protected as p53+/− brains (not shown), consistent with a previous report ( Crumrine et al., 1994 ).

CypD−/− mice show strong protection against focal ischemia-reperfusion brain injury ( Schinzel et al., 2005 ). Similarly, mice and rats treated with CsA or non-immunosuppressive derivatives that do not bind to calcineurin are also protected from stroke ( Khaspekov et al., 1999 ; Korde et al., 2007 ; Matsumoto et al., 1999 ). Clinically, CsA is chronically given to organ transplant patients as a time-tested immunosuppressant. Our data suggest that acute temporary blockade of the destructive p53-CypD complex by CsA-type inhibitors may be a therapeutic strategy to limit infarct extent in the rising number of ischemic stroke patients where reperfusion of the occluded artery can be reestablished by interventional thrombolysis.
