---
pmid: '20016603'
title: Mammalian SUMO E3-ligases PIAS1 and PIAS4 promote responses to DNA double-strand
  breaks.
authors:
- Galanty Y
- Belotserkovskaya R
- Coates J
- Polo S
- Miller KM
- Jackson SP
journal: Nature
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2904806
doi: 10.1038/nature08657
---

# Mammalian SUMO E3-ligases PIAS1 and PIAS4 promote responses to DNA double-strand breaks.
**Authors:** Galanty Y, Belotserkovskaya R, Coates J, Polo S, Miller KM, Jackson SP
**Journal:** Nature (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature08657](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08657)
**PMC:** [PMC2904806](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2904806/)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2009 Dec 17;462(7275):935-9. doi: 10.1038/nature08657.

Mammalian SUMO E3-ligases PIAS1 and PIAS4 promote responses to DNA double-strand 
breaks.

Galanty Y(1), Belotserkovskaya R, Coates J, Polo S, Miller KM, Jackson SP.

Author information:
(1)The Wellcome Trust and Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, and Department of 
Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK.

Comment in
    Nature. 2009 Dec 17;462(7275):857-8. doi: 10.1038/462857a.

DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are highly cytotoxic lesions that are generated 
by ionizing radiation and various DNA-damaging chemicals. Following DSB 
formation, cells activate the DNA-damage response (DDR) protein kinases ATM, ATR 
and DNA-PK (also known as PRKDC). These then trigger histone H2AX (also known as 
H2AFX) phosphorylation and the accumulation of proteins such as MDC1, 53BP1 
(also known as TP53BP1), BRCA1, CtIP (also known as RBBP8), RNF8 and 
RNF168/RIDDLIN into ionizing radiation-induced foci (IRIF) that amplify DSB 
signalling and promote DSB repair. Attachment of small ubiquitin-related 
modifier (SUMO) to target proteins controls diverse cellular functions. Here, we 
show that SUMO1, SUMO2 and SUMO3 accumulate at DSB sites in mammalian cells, 
with SUMO1 and SUMO2/3 accrual requiring the E3 ligase enzymes PIAS4 and PIAS1. 
We also establish that PIAS1 and PIAS4 are recruited to damage sites via 
mechanisms requiring their SAP domains, and are needed for the productive 
association of 53BP1, BRCA1 and RNF168 with such regions. Furthermore, we show 
that PIAS1 and PIAS4 promote DSB repair and confer ionizing radiation 
resistance. Finally, we establish that PIAS1 and PIAS4 are required for 
effective ubiquitin-adduct formation mediated by RNF8, RNF168 and BRCA1 at sites 
of DNA damage. These findings thus identify PIAS1 and PIAS4 as components of the 
DDR and reveal how protein recruitment to DSB sites is controlled by coordinated 
SUMOylation and ubiquitylation.

DOI: 10.1038/nature08657
PMCID: PMC2904806
PMID: 20016603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are highly cytotoxic lesions that are generated by ionizing radiation (IR) and various DNA-damaging chemicals. Following DSB formation, cells activate the DNA-damage response (DDR) protein kinases ATM, ATR and DNA-PK. These then trigger histone H2AX phosphorylation and the accumulation of proteins such as MDC1, 53BP1, BRCA1, CtIP, RNF8 and RNF168/RIDDLIN into IR-induced foci (IRIF) that amplify DSB signalling and promote DSB repair 1 , 2 . Attachment of Small Ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) to target proteins controls diverse cellular functions 3 - 6 . Here, we show that SUMO1, SUMO2 and SUMO3 accumulate at DSB sites in mammalian cells, with SUMO1 and SUMO2/3 accrual requiring the E3 ligase enzymes PIAS4 and PIAS1. We also establish that PIAS1 and PIAS4 are recruited to damage sites via mechanisms requiring their SAP domains, and are needed for the productive association of 53BP1, BRCA1 and RNF168 with such regions. Furthermore, we show that PIAS1 and PIAS4 promote DSB repair and confer IR resistance. Finally, we establish that PIAS1 and PIAS4 are required for effective Ubiquitin-adduct formation mediated by RNF8, RNF168 and BRCA1 at sites of DNA damage 7 - 11 . These findings thus identify PIAS1 and PIAS4 as components of the DDR and reveal how protein recruitment to DSB sites is controlled by coordinated sumoylation and ubiquitylation.

Methods summary

U2OS-based lines were maintained under standard conditions. cDNA cloning was by standard procedures. siRNA transfections were with Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Invitrogen). IR was administered with a Faxitron X-ray machine (Faxitron X-ray Corporation). ATM inhibition was by KU-55933 (KuDOS Pharmaceuticals). Laser micro-irradiation was with a FluoView 1000 confocal microscope (Olympus) with 37°C heating stage (Ibidi) and 405 nm diode (6 mW). FRAP was performed when laser-track accumulation of GFP-tagged protein reached maximal steady-state level. For immunofluorescence, cells were pre-extracted or not, fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde, permeabilized and stained. For whole cell extracts, cells were lysed on plates with 2% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 20 mM N-ethylmaleimide (Sigma-Aldrich) and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). To immunoprecipitate 53BP1, BRCA1 and sumoylated proteins, different lysis and binding buffers were used ( Supplementary Information ). HR and NHEJ assays were as previously described 17 , 28 . For IR survival, cells were transfected with siRNA and exposed to IR. After 10-14 days, colonies were stained with 0.5% crystal violet/20% ethanol, counted and normalized to plating efficiencies. For Florescence-Activated Cell Sorting (FACS) of propidium iodide-stained cells, data were analyzed by FlowJo software. All error-bars represent STDEV. Detailed descriptions of methods are provided in Supplementary Information .
