---
pmid: '22002246'
title: A novel disrupter of telomere silencing 1-like (DOT1L) interaction is required
  for signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1)-activated gene expression.
authors:
- Shah S
- Henriksen MA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3308833
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.284190
---

# A novel disrupter of telomere silencing 1-like (DOT1L) interaction is required for signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1)-activated gene expression.
**Authors:** Shah S, Henriksen MA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111.284190](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.284190)
**PMC:** [PMC3308833](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3308833/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 2;286(48):41195-41204. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.284190.
Epub  2011 Oct 15.

A novel disrupter of telomere silencing 1-like (DOT1L) interaction is required 
for signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1)-activated gene 
expression.

Shah S(1), Henriksen MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, The University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 
22903.
(2)Department of Biology, The University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 
22903. Electronic address: mah2hx@virginia.edu.

JAK-STAT-activated gene expression is both rapid and transient and requires 
dynamic post-translational modification of the chromatin template. Previously, 
we showed that following IFN-γ treatment, trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 
79 (H3K79me3) is rapidly and highly induced in the 5'-end of the STAT1-dependent 
gene interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1), but the role of this histone 
modification was unexplored. Here we report that DOT1L, the non-SET domain 
containing methyltransferase that modifies Lys-79, is localized across IRF1 in 
the uninduced state and is not further recruited by IFN-γ induction. 
RNAi-mediated depletion of DOT1L prevents the induction of H3K79me3 and lowers 
the transcription of IRF1 2-fold, as expected. Surprisingly, STAT1 binding to 
its DNA recognition element near the IRF1 promoter is diminished 2-fold in the 
DOT1L-depleted cell line. In vivo and in vitro protein interaction assays reveal 
a DOT1L-STAT1 interaction. Domain mapping identifies the middle region of DOT1L 
(amino acids 580-1183) as the STAT1 interaction domain. Overexpression of the 
DOT1L STAT1 interaction domain represses IRF1 transcription (2-fold) and 
interferes with STAT1 DNA binding at IRF1 and endogenous DOT1L histone 
methyltransferase activity. Collectively, our findings reveal a novel 
STAT1-DOT1L interaction that is required for the regulation JAK-STAT-inducible 
gene expression.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.284190
PMCID: PMC3308833
PMID: 22002246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

JAK-STAT-activated gene expression is both rapid and transient and requires dynamic post-translational modification of the chromatin template. Previously, we showed that following IFN-γ treatment, trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 79 (H3K79me3) is rapidly and highly induced in the 5′-end of the STAT1-dependent gene interferon regulatory factor 1 ( IRF1 ), but the role of this histone modification was unexplored. Here we report that DOT1L, the non-SET domain containing methyltransferase that modifies Lys-79, is localized across IRF1 in the uninduced state and is not further recruited by IFN-γ induction. RNAi-mediated depletion of DOT1L prevents the induction of H3K79me3 and lowers the transcription of IRF1 2-fold, as expected. Surprisingly, STAT1 binding to its DNA recognition element near the IRF1 promoter is diminished 2-fold in the DOT1L-depleted cell line. In vivo and in vitro protein interaction assays reveal a DOT1L-STAT1 interaction. Domain mapping identifies the middle region of DOT1L (amino acids 580–1183) as the STAT1 interaction domain. Overexpression of the DOT1L STAT1 interaction domain represses IRF1 transcription (2-fold) and interferes with STAT1 DNA binding at IRF1 and endogenous DOT1L histone methyltransferase activity. Collectively, our findings reveal a novel STAT1-DOT1L interaction that is required for the regulation JAK-STAT-inducible gene expression.

Introduction

S ignal t ransducers and a ctivators of t ranscription (STATs) regulate growth, differentiation, and the immune response in a wide variety of cells ( 1 ). These transcription factors are recruited to cell surface receptors by extracellular ligand binding. STATs are then activated by the Ja nus k inases (JAKs), allowing them to translocate to the nucleus and drive the transcription of target genes.

In the nucleus, the eukaryotic genome is organized as chromatin. DNA is wrapped around octamers composed of the core histone proteins (H2A, H2B, H3, and H4) to produce nucleosomes. The core histones are post-translationally modified, via acetylation, methylation, sumoylation, ubiquitination, and phosphorylation. These dynamic nuclear signaling events work in concert to regulate transcription by affecting nucleosomal interactions and the recruitment of an array of regulatory proteins ( 2 , 3 ).

Histone lysine methylation is particularly complex. It is associated with both activated and repressed chromatin states, depending on the site of modification. The degree of the methylation, i.e. mono-, di-, or trimethylation, correlates with different functional outputs. In addition, in mammalian systems, there are multiple histone methyltransferase-containing complexes. To date, all the known histone methyltransferases (HMTases) 2 identified contain a SET domain, with the exception of d isruptor o f t elomere silencing 1 (Dot1). Instead of a SET domain, Dot1 contains sequence motifs similar to ones found in DNA methyltransferases and protein arginine methyltransferases ( 4 ). Although most HMTases catalyze the addition of methyl groups on the protruding histone tails, Dot1 singularly methylates at lysine 79 (H3K79), which is located within the globular domain of histone H3 ( 5 ).

Like H3K4 methylation, H3K79 methylation depends on the monoubiquitination of H2B ( 6 – 8 ). A lysine-rich region of Dot1 (amino acids 101–140) directly interacts with ubiquitin and is important for ubH2B-mediated H3K79 methylation ( 9 ). Precisely how ubiquitin affects Dot1 in this cross-talk mechanism is not known; allostery, surface recruitment, and nucleosomal sterics are all possible mechanisms ( 10 ).

In yeast, H3K79 methylation is depleted at telomeric, mating-type, and ribosomal DNA but is ubiquitous elsewhere in the genome ( 11 – 13 ). Furthermore, methylation of H3K79 by Dot1 restricts the recruitment of s ilent i nformation r egulator (SIR) proteins to heterochromatic regions ( 11 ). Thus, Dot1 and H3K79 methylation generally defines euchromatin as permissive for transcription elongation in yeast ( 14 ).

The role of mammalian H3K79 methylation is less clear because it has been globally linked to both active and repressed chromatin states ( 11 , 15 ). Steger et al. ( 16 ) attempted to clarify its role by profiling H3K79 methylation in several mammalian cell lineages. They found that it correlated with actively transcribed chromatin and that its function was mainly similar to that described in yeast ( 11 , 17 ). Nevertheless, H3K79 methylation can be repressive of transcription at some gene loci. For example, when found in the promoters of aldosterone-regulated genes ( 18 ), such as epithelial Na + channel ( ENaCα ) ( 19 ) and connective tissue growth factor ( CTGF ) ( 20 ), H3K79me3 inhibits basal transcription.

Mammalian Dot1 (DOT1L) is involved in several cellular processes including ES cell differentiation and embryonic development ( 21 , 22 ), cardiac function ( 23 ), WNT signaling ( 24 ), parental allele discrimination ( 25 ), intestinal homeostasis ( 26 ), DNA damage response ( 27 , 28 ), and erythropoiesis ( 29 ). In mixed lineage leukemia, mistargeting of DOT1L by several different MLL fusion proteins causes aberrant H3K79me3 and subsequent activation of target genes (reviewed in Ref. 30 ). The mechanistic basis for DOT1L function, however, remains largely undefined.

We investigated the contribution that DOT1L and histone H3K79 methylation make to the rapid and transient gene expression induced downstream of JAK-STAT signaling. We present evidence for a novel interaction between STAT1 and the middle region of DOT1L (amino acids 586–1138) that is required for proper IRF1 gene expression.

DISCUSSION

DOT1L is the only non-SET domain containing HMTase, and it the only known HMTase that modifies Lys-79 of histone H3. Despite its unique features, DOT1L is enigmatic in its function. In this study, we exploited the highly rapid and transient gene expression that is induced by JAK-STAT signaling to investigate DOT1L and more fully define its role in the regulation of transcription.
