---
pmid: '16818445'
title: Wnt9a signaling is required for joint integrity and regulation of Ihh during
  chondrogenesis.
authors:
- Später D
- Hill TP
- O'sullivan RJ
- Gruber M
- Conner DA
- Hartmann C
journal: Development
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC12168028
doi: 10.1242/dev.02471
---

# Wnt9a signaling is required for joint integrity and regulation of Ihh during chondrogenesis.
**Authors:** Später D, Hill TP, O'sullivan RJ, Gruber M, Conner DA, Hartmann C
**Journal:** Development (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.02471](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.02471)
**PMC:** [PMC12168028](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12168028/)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2006 Aug;133(15):3039-49. doi: 10.1242/dev.02471. Epub 2006 Jul
3.

Wnt9a signaling is required for joint integrity and regulation of Ihh during 
chondrogenesis.

Später D(1), Hill TP, O'sullivan RJ, Gruber M, Conner DA, Hartmann C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology, Dr Bohr-Gasse 7, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

Joints, which separate skeleton elements, serve as important signaling centers 
that regulate the growth of adjacent cartilage elements by controlling 
proliferation and maturation of chondrocytes. Accurate chondrocyte maturation is 
crucial for endochondral ossification and for the ultimate size of skeletal 
elements, as premature or delayed maturation results predominantly in shortened 
elements. Wnt9a has previously been implicated as being a player in joint 
induction, based on gain-of function experiments in chicken and mouse. We show 
that loss of Wnt9a does not affect joint induction, but results to synovial 
chondroid metaplasia in some joints. This phenotype can be enhanced by removal 
of an additional Wnt gene, Wnt4, suggesting that Wnts are playing a crucial role 
in directing bi-potential chondro-synovioprogenitors to become synovial 
connective tissue, by actively suppressing their chondrogenic potential. 
Furthermore, we show that Wnt9a is a temporal and spatial regulator of Indian 
hedgehog (Ihh), a central player of skeletogenesis. Loss of Wnt9a activity 
results in transient downregulation of Ihh and reduced Ihh-signaling activity at 
E12.5-E13.5. The canonical Wnt/beta-catenin pathway probably mediates regulation 
of Ihh expression in prehypertrophic chondrocytes by Wnt9a, because embryos 
double-heterozygous for Wnt9a and beta-catenin show reduced Ihh expression, and 
in vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrates a direct interaction between 
the beta-catenin/Lef1 complex and the Ihh promoter.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.02471
PMID: 16818445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
