---
pmid: '17253964'
title: Adrenaline is a critical mediator of acute exercise-induced AMP-activated protein
  kinase activation in adipocytes.
authors:
- Koh HJ
- Hirshman MF
- He H
- Li Y
- Manabe Y
- Balschi JA
- Goodyear LJ
journal: Biochem J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1876380
doi: 10.1042/BJ20061479
---

# Adrenaline is a critical mediator of acute exercise-induced AMP-activated protein kinase activation in adipocytes.
**Authors:** Koh HJ, Hirshman MF, He H, Li Y, Manabe Y, Balschi JA, Goodyear LJ
**Journal:** Biochem J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20061479](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20061479)
**PMC:** [PMC1876380](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1876380/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2007 May 1;403(3):473-81. doi: 10.1042/BJ20061479.

Adrenaline is a critical mediator of acute exercise-induced AMP-activated 
protein kinase activation in adipocytes.

Koh HJ(1), Hirshman MF, He H, Li Y, Manabe Y, Balschi JA, Goodyear LJ.

Author information:
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center and Department of Medicine, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Exercise increases AMPK (AMP-activated protein kinase) activity in human and rat 
adipocytes, but the underlying molecular mechanisms and functional consequences 
of this activation are not known. Since adrenaline (epinephrine) concentrations 
increase with exercise, in the present study we hypothesized that adrenaline 
activates AMPK in adipocytes. We show that a single bout of exercise increases 
AMPKalpha1 and alpha2 activities and ACC (acetyl-CoA carboxylase) Ser79 
phosphorylation in rat adipocytes. Similarly to exercise, adrenaline treatment 
in vivo increased AMPK activities and ACC phosphorylation. Pre-treatment of rats 
with the beta-blocker propranolol fully blocked exercise-induced AMPK 
activation. Increased AMPK activity with exercise and adrenaline treatment in 
vivo was accompanied by an increased AMP/ATP ratio. Adrenaline incubation of 
isolated adipocytes also increased the AMP/ATP ratio and AMPK activities, an 
effect blocked by propranolol. Adrenaline incubation increased lipolysis in 
isolated adipocytes, and Compound C, an AMPK inhibitor, attenuated this effect. 
Finally, a potential role for AMPK in the decreased adiposity associated with 
chronic exercise was suggested by marked increases in AMPKalpha1 and alpha2 
activities in adipocytes from rats trained for 6 weeks. In conclusion, both 
acute and chronic exercise are significant regulators of AMPK activity in rat 
adipocytes. Our findings suggest that adrenaline plays a critical role in 
exercise-stimulated AMPKalpha1 and alpha2 activities in adipocytes, and that 
AMPK can function in the regulation of lipolysis.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20061479
PMCID: PMC1876380
PMID: 17253964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Exercise increases AMPK (AMP-activated protein kinase) activity in human and rat adipocytes, but the underlying molecular mechanisms and functional consequences of this activation are not known. Since adrenaline (epinephrine) concentrations increase with exercise, in the present study we hypothesized that adrenaline activates AMPK in adipocytes. We show that a single bout of exercise increases AMPKα1 and α2 activities and ACC (acetyl-CoA carboxylase) Ser 79 phosphorylation in rat adipocytes. Similarly to exercise, adrenaline treatment in vivo increased AMPK activities and ACC phosphorylation. Pre-treatment of rats with the β-blocker propranolol fully blocked exercise-induced AMPK activation. Increased AMPK activity with exercise and adrenaline treatment in vivo was accompanied by an increased AMP/ATP ratio. Adrenaline incubation of isolated adipocytes also increased the AMP/ATP ratio and AMPK activities, an effect blocked by propranolol. Adrenaline incubation increased lipolysis in isolated adipocytes, and Compound C, an AMPK inhibitor, attenuated this effect. Finally, a potential role for AMPK in the decreased adiposity associated with chronic exercise was suggested by marked increases in AMPKα1 and α2 activities in adipocytes from rats trained for 6 weeks. In conclusion, both acute and chronic exercise are significant regulators of AMPK activity in rat adipocytes. Our findings suggest that adrenaline plays a critical role in exercise-stimulated AMPKα1 and α2 activities in adipocytes, and that AMPK can function in the regulation of lipolysis.

INTRODUCTION

It is widely accepted that physical exercise is an efficient way to reduce visceral fat, the fat depot that is thought to contribute to obesity-associated complications such as Type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. A single bout of exercise decreases fatty acid synthesis and increases lipolysis in adipocytes [ 1 , 2 ], suggesting that regular exercise training reduces adiposity by repeated activation of the lipolytic process and the reduction of fatty acid synthesis [ 3 ]. The underlying molecular mechanisms by which an acute bout of exercise decreases fatty acid synthesis and increases lipolysis in adipocytes are not fully understood.

Physical exercise increases the concentration of several blood hormones, neurotransmitters and other circulating factors, including adrenaline (epinephrine). Adrenaline binds to and acts through the adrenergic receptor pathway, increasing lipolysis via a mechanism that involves activation of PKA (cAMP-dependent protein kinase). PKA phosphorylates HSL (hormone-sensitive lipase) at Ser 563 , Ser 659 and Ser 660 [ 4 ], two of which are critical sites for HSL activity [ 4 ]. Adrenaline also inhibits fatty acid synthesis via inhibition of ACC (acetyl-CoA carboxylase), the rate-limiting enzyme in fatty acid synthesis, although the mechanism by which adrenaline regulates ACC activity has not been elucidated.

AMPK (AMP-activated protein kinase) is a member of an energy-sensing serine/threonine protein kinase family. AMPK is activated by an increase in the AMP/ATP ratio, via a complex mechanism that involves allosteric modification, phosphorylation by one or more AMPK kinases and a decrease in phosphatase activities [ 5 ]. There have been relatively few reports of AMPK function in adipocyte metabolism, and the reports that do exist have been somewhat inconsistent. Activation of AMPK by AICAR (5-amino-4-imidazolecarboxamide riboside) in isolated fat cells has been shown to inhibit isoprenaline (isoproterenol)-induced lipolysis [ 6 , 7 ], suggesting that AMPK may be a negative regulator of lipolytic activity. On the other hand, AMPK activation in 3T3-L1 cells did not inhibit adrenaline-stimulated HSL activity or glycerol release [ 8 ]. Overexpression of a dominant-inhibitory mutant of AMPK in 3T3-L1 cells impaired isoprenaline-induced lipolysis, suggesting that AMPK activity is a positive regulator of lipolysis in adipocytes [ 9 ]. Furthermore, compared with wild-type mice, AMPKα2 whole-body knockout mice have greater increases in adiposity and adipocyte hypertrophy in response to high-fat feeding [ 10 ].

Previous studies have demonstrated that exercise increases AMPK in rat [ 11 ] and human [ 8 ] adipocytes. In addition, two studies have indicated that adrenergic receptor activation can stimulate AMPK in L6 cells [ 12 ] and brown adipocytes [ 13 ]. Since adrenaline is a hormone induced by exercise and acts through β-adrenergic receptors, we hypothesized that adrenaline is a mediator of exercise-induced AMPK activation in adipocytes.

In the present study, we investigated the effects of both acute exercise and chronic exercise training on AMPK activities in rat adipocytes isolated from epididymal fat pads. We also tested the hypothesis that exercise-induced increases in circulating adrenaline are responsible for increased AMPK activity in adipocytes. To study further the effects of adrenaline on adipocyte metabolism, we incubated isolated rat adipocytes in vitro and assessed the regulation of AMPK, ACC, the AMP/ATP ratio and lipolysis. Our results demonstrate that both a single bout of exercise and chronic exercise training are major regulators of AMPK activity in adipocytes, and that adrenaline plays an important role in the effects of acute exercise to activate AMPK in rat adipocytes in vivo . Furthermore, AMPK activity is necessary for maximal activation of adrenaline-induced lipolysis in rat adipocytes.

DISCUSSION

The effects of chronic exercise training to reduce adiposity in humans results from an overall increase in energy expenditure, due largely to the increased energy demands of the working skeletal muscles during each individual exercise bout. During aerobic exercise, the contracting skeletal muscles require increased carbohydrate and fat, the latter fuel derived almost exclusively from adipocyte lipolysis. Adrenaline has long been known to be an important mediator of exercise-stimulated adipocyte lipolysis, and the results of the present study suggest that AMPK may be an intermediate for this effect. The β-blocker propranolol fully inhibited the increase in AMPK activity and phosphorylation in adipocytes of exercised rats. Furthermore, injection of adrenaline in vivo mimicked the effects of exercise to increase AMPK activity and phosphorylation. Although we cannot fully rule out the possibility that other circulating factors (e.g. hormones and noradrenaline), which are also increased by physical exercise and act through β-adrenergic receptors, are contributing to the effects of exercise on AMPK activity in adipocytes, our data strongly support a primary role for circulating adrenaline.

If adrenaline is mediating the effects of acute exercise to increase AMPK activity, and adrenaline itself increases AMPK activity, what is the mechanism for the adrenaline-induced increases in AMPK activity? Our findings suggest that increases in AMPK activity with exercise and adrenaline in vivo and adrenaline in the isolated adipocytes are due, at least in part, to increases in cellular AMP concentrations. Increases in adrenaline-mediated AMP concentrations are consistent with studies in human adipocytes showing that increases in cAMP and adenine nucleotide catabolism by adrenaline or isoprenaline are associated with an enhanced release of purines in the form of inosine and hypoxanthine [ 33 , 34 ]. Collectively, adrenaline seems to decrease ATP and increase AMP due to increased ATP utilization and adenine nucleotide breakdown, which results in increases in the AMP/ATP ratio, a critical regulator for AMPK activation [ 35 ].

Exercise and adrenaline increased Ser 79 phosphorylation of ACC ( Figures 1 D and 2 D), which in turn decreased ACC activity, and adrenaline-induced ACC Ser 79 phosphorylation was abolished by Compound C treatment, suggesting that adrenaline increased ACC Ser 79 phosphorylation by AMPK. It has been reported that PKA, which is activated by adrenaline, also phosphorylates ACC, but this phosphorylation is not necessary for ACC activity [ 36 ]. Although we cannot exclude the possibility that ACC phosphorylation by PKA contributes to adrenaline-induced ACC activity, it is apparent that AMPK is a major regulator of ACC activity in adrenaline-induced ACC Ser 79 phosphorylation.

A previous study has reported that 30 min of treadmill exercise increases total AMPK activity 1.5-fold in rat adipocytes [ 11 ]. Our findings demonstrate that a single bout of exercise increases the activity of both the AMPKα1 and AMPKα2 catalytic subunits, as well as AMPK Thr 172 and ACC Ser 79 phosphorylation approx. 2–3-fold. We also show that AMPK activation and phosphorylation occur with only 15 min of exercise, but are not maintained with longer periods of exercise or in the post-exercise period. Interestingly, in the skeletal muscle of these same animals, AMPKα2 activity and AMPK Thr 172 phosphorylation are increased with 60 min of exercise (H.-J. Koh and L. J. Goodyear, unpublished work). Thus it appears that a single bout of exercise induces a transient activation of AMPK in adipocytes, whereas effects in skeletal muscle are more prolonged. AMPK in adipocytes may be turned on rapidly and transiently because AMPK may function to regulate one or more aspects of the lipolytic machinery in priming fashion. Thus, if AMPK primes adipocytes for lipolysis, i.e. phosphorylates HSL and promotes its translocation into lipid droplets [ 9 ], sustained activation of AMPK may not be needed when exercise continues for periods longer than 30 min.

Adipocytes are important organs in which to store excess energy as triacylglycerols and provide energy to skeletal muscles in the form of unbound (‘free’) fatty acids during conditions of increased energy demand such as exercise [ 37 ]. The role of AMPK in adipocytes is poorly understood, most notably whether AMPK acts as a pro- or anti-lipolytic signal. Previous reports suggested that the role of AMPK in adipocytes is to function as an anti-lipolytic signal [ 6 , 38 , 39 ]. In the present study, we found that modulation of AMPK activity by AICAR or Compound C did not affect lipolysis as well as HSL Ser 563 phosphorylation (results not shown and Figure 6 B). However, inhibition of AMPK by Compound C partially blunted adrenaline-induced lipolysis and HSL phosphorylation ( Figures 6 B and 6 C), suggesting that AMPK is necessary for adrenaline-induced lipolysis. The reasons for the differences in the role of AMPK activation on lipolysis in adipocytes between previous studies and the present study are not clear. However, two studies have recently reached the same conclusion for the function of AMPK as a pro-lipolytic signal [ 8 , 9 ]. Furthermore, the effects of AMPK on HSL activity in a tissue-specific manner have been investigated [ 8 ]. HSL activity was reduced in L6 myotubes expressing constitutively active AMPK, while AMPK activation did not prevent HSL activity or glycerol release in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Exercise training results in enhanced sensitivity to hormones that control adipocyte lipolysis [ 40 , 41 ]. If AMPK is an important mediator of lipolysis with exercise, then one would predict that AMPK activity would be increased with chronic exercise training. In fact, we found a 2-fold increase in the activity of both AMPK isoforms, as well as a significant increase in AMPK Thr 172 phosphorylation in rats trained for 6 weeks. Interestingly, the increase in activity was not accompanied by an increase in the expression of the AMPK catalytic subunits. In addition, training did not result in significant changes in the protein content of LKB1 and CaMKK, known upstream kinases for AMPK ([ 42 – 47 ], and H.-J. Koh and L. J. Goodyear, unpublished work). Determination of the underlying mechanism is currently ongoing in our laboratory. Thus adipocytes adapt to changes in training status by increasing AMPK activity, a factor that may play a role in the effects of training to increase lipolysis. The effect of training to increase adipocyte AMPK activity is different from that which occurs in skeletal muscle, where previous work has shown no change in AMPK activity in response to endurance exercise training [ 48 , 49 ]. Similarly to published reports, AMPK activity in multiple skeletal muscles were not increased in the animals used in the present study (H.-J. Koh and L. J. Goodyear, unpublished work). This demonstrates that adipocytes and skeletal muscle adapt differently to training, and point to differing functions of AMPK in these tissues.

In summary, we show that acute exercise and adrenaline activate AMPK activity in adipocytes. Inhibition of the β-adrenergic receptor abolished the effects of exercise and adrenaline on AMPK activity in adipocytes. We also demonstrate that adrenaline and a single bout of exercise increase the AMP/ATP ratio in adipocytes. Activation of AMPK by adrenaline contributes to maximally activate lipolysis and phosphorylate ACC. All these data suggest that adrenaline is a major molecule for acute exercise-induced AMPK activation, and probably contributes to the benefits of exercise to reduce adiposity. Fully elucidating the molecular signals that mediate the effects of exercise to activate lipolysis has important medical relevance and could provide clues in the development of anti-obesity agents.
