---
pmid: '17052756'
title: Bcl10 is phosphorylated on Ser138 by Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase
  II.
authors:
- Ishiguro K
- Ando T
- Goto H
- Xavier R
journal: Mol Immunol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC8957800
doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2006.09.012
---

# Bcl10 is phosphorylated on Ser138 by Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II.
**Authors:** Ishiguro K, Ando T, Goto H, Xavier R
**Journal:** Mol Immunol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molimm.2006.09.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molimm.2006.09.012)
**PMC:** [PMC8957800](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8957800/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Immunol. 2007 Mar;44(8):2095-100. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2006.09.012. Epub 
2006 Oct 18.

Bcl10 is phosphorylated on Ser138 by Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase 
II.

Ishiguro K(1), Ando T, Goto H, Xavier R.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology and Pathogenesis of Gastroenterology, Nagoya University 
School of Medicine, 65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi 466-8550, Japan. 
kio@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Ordered assembly of scaffold proteins Carma1-Bcl10-Malt1 determines NF-kappaB 
activation following T cell receptor (TCR) engagement. Carma1-Bcl10 interaction 
and the signaling pathway are controlled by Carma1 phosphorylation, which are 
induced by PKCtheta and Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII). 
In addition to Carma1 phosphorylation, previous studies have demonstrated that 
Bcl10 is phosphorylated in the C-terminal Ser/Thr rich region following TCR 
engagement. However the kinases that phosphorylate Bcl10 are incompletely 
understood. Here we show that CaMKII phosphorylates Bcl10 on Ser138. 
Furthermore, a CaMKII inhibitor, KN93, and CaMKII siRNA substantially reduce 
Bcl10 phosphorylation induced by phorbol myristate acetate/ionomycin. S138A 
mutation prolongs Bcl10-induced NF-kappaB activation, suggesting that Bcl10 
phosphorylation is involved in attenuation of NF-kappaB activation. These 
findings suggest that CaMKII modulates NF-kappaB activation via phosphorylating 
Bcl10 as well as Carma1.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2006.09.012
PMID: 17052756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Engagement of T cell receptors (TCRs) with cognate antigens triggers cascades of signaling pathways in helper T cells. TCR signaling is essential for the effector function of helper T cells including proliferation, differentiation and cytokine production. It also modulates effector T cell fate by inducing cell death, anergy (non-responsiveness), exhaustion and generation of regulatory T cells. One of the main axes of TCR signaling is the Ca 2+ -calcineurin-nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) signaling pathway. Stimulation of TCRs triggers depletion of intracellular Ca 2+ store and in turn, activates store-operated Ca 2+ entry (SOCE) to raise the intracellular Ca 2+ concentration. SOCE in T cells is mediated by the Ca 2+ release-activated Ca 2+ (CRAC) channels, which have been very well characterized in terms of their electrophysiological properties. Identification of STIM1 as a sensor to detect depletion of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) Ca 2+ store and Orai1 as the pore subunit of CRAC channels has dramatically advanced our understanding of the regulatory mechanism of Ca 2+ signaling in T cells. In this review, we discuss our current understanding of Ca 2+ signaling in T cells with specific focus on the mechanism of CRAC channel activation and regulation via protein interactions. In addition, we will discuss the role of CRAC channels in effector T cells based on the analyses of genetically modified animal models.

Introduction

Ca 2+ ion is ubiquitously utilized as a second messenger to regulate diverse cellular functions. However, in spite of its broad role, Ca 2+ signaling has specificity to activate distinct downstream signaling pathways depending on the types of ligands and agonists. Each cell type including T cells expresses a unique blend of various Ca 2+ channels or transporters to mediate Ca 2+ signaling. Under resting conditions, cytoplasmic Ca 2+ concentration ([Ca 2+ ]) in T cells is in the range of ~100 nM while that in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which serves as an intracellular Ca 2+ store, is much higher (~400 μM). Extracellular [Ca 2+ ] (e.g., blood) reaches almost 2 mM, establishing a huge [Ca 2+ ] gradient between the extracellular milieu, Ca 2+ store, and the cytoplasm. Therefore, maintaining Ca 2+ homeostasis in the resting state requires dynamic Ca 2+ entry and exclusion across the membranes. After TCR stimulation, Ca 2+ entry via store-operated Ca 2+ (SOC) channels is a predominant mechanism to increase the intracellular Ca 2+ concentration ([Ca 2+ ] i ) in T cells ( Cahalan et al., 2009 ; Hogan et al., 2010 ; Lewis, 2011 ; Putney, 2009 ; Srikanth et al., 2013b ). SOC channels were so named because they are activated by depletion of intracellular Ca 2+ stores ( Putney, 2009 , 1986 ). The Ca 2+ release-activated Ca 2+ (CRAC) channel is a prototype and specialized class of SOC channel in immune cells. Increased Ca 2+ ions can affect many signaling pathways, for example, via directly binding to anionic phospholipids or activation of Ca 2+ -sensing signaling amplifiers including calmodulin (CaM), which in turn activate a large number of protein kinases/phosphatases to affect gene expression. Because the volume of ER in T lymphocytes is much smaller than that in other cell types, SOCE via CRAC channels is particularly important for activation of the NFAT (nuclear factor of activated T cells) family of transcription factors, which require sustained levels of increased [Ca 2+ ] i . In the current review, we will focus on our current understanding of the regulation of Ca 2+ signaling in T cells and phenotypes of animal models lacking the key components of CRAC channels, which provide insights into their physiological roles in the immune system.
