---
pmid: '19465887'
title: The ER-resident ubiquitin-specific protease 19 participates in the UPR and
  rescues ERAD substrates.
authors:
- Hassink GC
- Zhao B
- Sompallae R
- Altun M
- Gastaldello S
- Zinin NV
- Masucci MG
- Lindsten K
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC2727442
doi: 10.1038/embor.2009.69
---

# The ER-resident ubiquitin-specific protease 19 participates in the UPR and rescues ERAD substrates.
**Authors:** Hassink GC, Zhao B, Sompallae R, Altun M, Gastaldello S, Zinin NV, Masucci MG, Lindsten K
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/embor.2009.69](https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2009.69)
**PMC:** [PMC2727442](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2727442/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2009 Jul;10(7):755-61. doi: 10.1038/embor.2009.69. Epub 2009 May 22.

The ER-resident ubiquitin-specific protease 19 participates in the UPR and 
rescues ERAD substrates.

Hassink GC(1), Zhao B, Sompallae R, Altun M, Gastaldello S, Zinin NV, Masucci 
MG, Lindsten K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.

Ubiquitination regulates membrane events such as endocytosis, membrane 
trafficking and endoplasmic-reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD). Although 
the involvement of membrane-associated ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes and ligases 
in these processes is well documented, their regulation by ubiquitin 
deconjugases is less well understood. By screening a database of human 
deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs), we have identified a putative transmembrane 
domain in ubiquitin-specific protease (USP)19. We show that USP19 is a 
tail-anchored ubiquitin-specific protease localized to the ER and is a target of 
the unfolded protein response. USP19 rescues the ERAD substrates cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR)DeltaF508 and T-cell receptor-alpha 
(TCRalpha) from proteasomal degradation. A catalytically inactive USP19 was 
still able to partly rescue TCRalpha but not CFTRDeltaF508, suggesting that 
USP19 might also exert a non-catalytic function on specific ERAD substrates. 
Thus, USP19 is the first example of a membrane-anchored DUB involved in the 
turnover of ERAD substrates.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2009.69
PMCID: PMC2727442
PMID: 19465887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Ubiquitination regulates membrane events such as endocytosis, membrane trafficking and endoplasmic-reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD). Although the involvement of membrane-associated ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes and ligases in these processes is well documented, their regulation by ubiquitin deconjugases is less well understood. By screening a database of human deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs), we have identified a putative transmembrane domain in ubiquitin-specific protease (USP)19. We show that USP19 is a tail-anchored ubiquitin-specific protease localized to the ER and is a target of the unfolded protein response. USP19 rescues the ERAD substrates cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR)ΔF508 and T-cell receptor-α (TCRα) from proteasomal degradation. A catalytically inactive USP19 was still able to partly rescue TCRα but not CFTRΔF508, suggesting that USP19 might also exert a non-catalytic function on specific ERAD substrates. Thus, USP19 is the first example of a membrane-anchored DUB involved in the turnover of ERAD substrates.

Introduction

Protein modifications by ubiquitin control protein stability and function, which are essential for cellular processes such as transcription, DNA repair, cell-cycle progression and apoptosis ( Ciechanover, 2005 ). Ubiquitination is a reversible process performed by deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs), of which only a minority has been functionally characterized ( Nijman et al , 2005 ). Their roles are diverse, varying from maintaining the pool of free ubiquitin to regulatory activities on specific substrates or signalling pathways, making them potentially interesting as therapeutic targets ( Nalepa et al , 2006 ; Daviet & Colland, 2008 ). Five sub-families of DUBs are known, including: ubiquitin-specific proteases, carboxy-terminal hydrolases, otubain proteases, the Machado–Joseph disease proteases and the metallo-proteases referred to as JAMM (JAB1/MPN/Mov34).

Ubiquitination of membrane proteins controls processes such as endocytosis, membrane trafficking ( Hicke & Dunn, 2003 ), Golgi reassembly after mitosis and endoplasmic-reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD; Meusser et al , 2005 ). The regulatory function of DUBs in these processes is becoming increasingly clear; however, few DUBs are known to be membrane spanning. Only UBP16 was shown to be exclusively associated with membranes in yeast ( Kinner & Kolling, 2003 ), and recently its human homologue, USP30, was shown to be important for maintaining proper mitochondrial morphology ( Nakamura & Hirose, 2008 ).

Using a bioinformatics approach, we have identified a transmembrane (TM) domain in the ubiquitin-specific protease 19 (USP19). We show that USP19 is an ER-resident tail-anchored DUB that is upregulated during the unfolded protein response (UPR) and rescues the ERAD substrates green fluorescent protein (GFP)-cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR)Δ508 and FLAG-T-cell receptor (TCR)α from proteasomal degradation. Thus, USP19 seems to be a new player in ERAD.

Methods

Database searches. Protein sequences of human DUBs were extracted from the UniProt/Swiss-Prot database version 51.2 and the TM-HMM 2.0 algorithm ( Krogh et al , 2001 ) was used to identify candidates with putative transmembrane domains. Domain mapping was performed using the CDART ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/cdd.shtml) , SMART ( http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/ ) and Pfam ( http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/Pfam/ ) algorithms and databases.

Plasmids. USP19 was PCR amplified from cDNA (Kazusa DNA Research Institute) and cloned in the pcDNA4/Myc-His-B vector (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The active site mutant USP19 C506S was generated using the Quickchange mutagenesis kit (Stratagene; www.stratagene.com ). GST- and GFP-tagged USP19 was cloned in the pGEX-5X-1 vector (Amersham) and pEGFP-N2 vector (Clontech, Mountain View, CA, USA), respectively. For generation of the ubiquitin or ubiquitin-like (Ubl)–β-galactosidase (β-gal) fusion proteins, the lacZ gene was PCR amplified from pYC6-LacZ (Invitrogen, V8255-20) and cloned into pACYCDuet1; Novagen, Darmstadt, Germany, 71147-3). Ubl cDNAs were then cloned in frame with the β-gal reporter generating the pACYC-Ub/Nedd8/SUMO1/SUMO3/ISG15/FAT10–LacZ constructs. The primers used for cloning are listed in supplementary Table 1 online.

Membrane fractionation and proteinase K digestion. Lysates from HEK293T cells were prepared using 50 strokes with a dounce homogenizer in a buffer containing 50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 250 mM sucrose, 25 mM KCl, 0.5 mM MgCl 2 and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Indianapolis, IN, USA). Cell debris and nuclei were removed by 10 min centrifugation at 1,500 g , +4°C, generating the post-nuclear supernatant from which microsomes were enriched by centrifugation at 100,000 g for 1 h, +4°C. The microsome fraction was treated with 0.4 μg/ml proteinase K for 20 min on ice ±1% NP40 (Igepal, Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA).

Antibodies and immunostaining. Antibodies against β-actin (AC-15), Myc (9E10), GST (B-14) and GFP (SC-8334) (all from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), FLAG (M2; Sigma), GFP (Ab290; Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), S-tag (71549-3; Novagen), Grp78/Bip and p38 (both from Cell Signaling, Beverly, MA, USA), USP19/ZMYND9 (Bethyl Laboratories, Montgomery, TX, USA), haemagglutinin (HA) (12CA5; Roche) and red fluorescent protein (from Jacques Neefjes, The Netherlands Cancer Institute) were used in western blots together with the appropriate horse radish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibody (Zymed, San Francisco, CA, USA). For immunofluorescence, HEK293 cells stably expressing tagged USP19 were grown on poly- L lysine (Sigma)-coated coverslips. The cells were fixed in 4% formaldehyde and stained with calnexin (AF18; Abcam) or giantin (PRB-114C; Biosite) antibodies diluted in 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 0.9% NaCl, 0.1% gelatin and 0.5% Triton X-100. The result was analysed using a Zeiss Axiovert confocal microscope.

DUB assays. Deconjugase activity was investigated in bacterial co-transformation assays as described earlier ( Sompallae et al , 2008 ). Ubiquitin conjugates were enriched by immunoprecipitation from COS7 cells expressing HA-Ub. The immunoprecipitates were incubated with 0.2 μg GST-USP19ΔTM in a buffer containing 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 2 mM DTT at 37°C for the indicated time.

Real-time PCR. Total RNA was isolated according to the RNeasy plus protocol (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). cDNA was transcribed using QuantiTect™ SYBR ® -green mastermix (Qiagen) and real-time PCR was carried out with the appropriate primer pairs ( supplementary Table 2 online) in an ABI-Prism 7000 instrument (Applied Biosystems; www.appliedbiosystems.com ). Real-time analysis of SYBR green chemistry values was performed as described earlier ( Edstrom & Ulfhake, 2005 ). GAPDH and β-actin were used as internal controls to confirm RNA integrity.

Supplementary information is available at EMBO reports online ( http://www.emboreports.org ).
