---
pmid: '2120195'
title: Molecular characterization of the acyl-coenzyme A:isopenicillin N acyltransferase
  gene (penDE) from Penicillium chrysogenum and Aspergillus nidulans and activity
  of recombinant enzyme in Escherichia coli.
authors:
- Tobin MB
- Fleming MD
- Skatrud PL
- Miller JR
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '1990'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC526911
doi: 10.1128/jb.172.10.5908-5914.1990
---

# Molecular characterization of the acyl-coenzyme A:isopenicillin N acyltransferase gene (penDE) from Penicillium chrysogenum and Aspergillus nidulans and activity of recombinant enzyme in Escherichia coli.
**Authors:** Tobin MB, Fleming MD, Skatrud PL, Miller JR
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jb.172.10.5908-5914.1990](https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.172.10.5908-5914.1990)
**PMC:** [PMC526911](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC526911/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 1990 Oct;172(10):5908-14. doi: 10.1128/jb.172.10.5908-5914.1990.

Molecular characterization of the acyl-coenzyme A:isopenicillin N 
acyltransferase gene (penDE) from Penicillium chrysogenum and Aspergillus 
nidulans and activity of recombinant enzyme in Escherichia coli.

Tobin MB(1), Fleming MD, Skatrud PL, Miller JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics Research, Lilly Research Laboratories, 
Indianapolis, Indiana 46285.

The final step in the biosynthesis of beta-lactam antibiotics in Penicillium 
chrysogenum and Aspergillus nidulans involves removal of the L-alpha-aminoadipyl 
side chain from isopenicillin N (IPN) and exchange with a nonpolar side chain. 
The enzyme catalyzing this reaction, acyl-coenzyme A:isopenicillin N 
acyltransferase (acyltransferase), was purified from P. chrysogenum and A. 
nidulans. Based on NH2-terminal amino acid sequence information, the 
acyltransferase gene (penDE) from P. chrysogenum and A. nidulans were cloned. In 
both organisms, penDE was located immediately downstream from the isopenicillin 
N synthetase gene (pcbC) and consisted of four exons encoding an enzyme of 357 
amino acids (approximately 40 kilodaltons [kDa]). The DNA coding sequences 
showed approximately 73% identity, while the amino acid sequences were 
approximately 76% identical. Noncoding DNA regions (including the region between 
pcbC and penDE) were not conserved. Acyltransferase activity from Escherichia 
coli producing the 40-kDa protein accepted either 6-aminopenicillanic acid or 
IPN as the substrate and made a penicillinase-sensitive antibiotic in the 
presence of phenylacetyl coenzyme A. Therefore, a single gene is responsible for 
converting IPN to penicillin G. The active form of the enzyme may result from 
processing of the 40-kDa monomeric precursor to a heterodimer containing 
subunits of 11 and 29 kDa.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.172.10.5908-5914.1990
PMCID: PMC526911
PMID: 2120195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The final step in the biosynthesis of beta-lactam antibiotics in Penicillium chrysogenum and Aspergillus nidulans involves removal of the L-alpha-aminoadipyl side chain from isopenicillin N (IPN) and exchange with a nonpolar side chain. The enzyme catalyzing this reaction, acyl-coenzyme A:isopenicillin N acyltransferase (acyltransferase), was purified from P. chrysogenum and A. nidulans. Based on NH2-terminal amino acid sequence information, the acyltransferase gene (penDE) from P. chrysogenum and A. nidulans were cloned. In both organisms, penDE was located immediately downstream from the isopenicillin N synthetase gene (pcbC) and consisted of four exons encoding an enzyme of 357 amino acids (approximately 40 kilodaltons [kDa]). The DNA coding sequences showed approximately 73% identity, while the amino acid sequences were approximately 76% identical. Noncoding DNA regions (including the region between pcbC and penDE) were not conserved. Acyltransferase activity from Escherichia coli producing the 40-kDa protein accepted either 6-aminopenicillanic acid or IPN as the substrate and made a penicillinase-sensitive antibiotic in the presence of phenylacetyl coenzyme A. Therefore, a single gene is responsible for converting IPN to penicillin G. The active form of the enzyme may result from processing of the 40-kDa monomeric precursor to a heterodimer containing subunits of 11 and 29 kDa.
