---
pmid: '10815637'
title: Effects of deficiency in p53 or bcl-2 on the sensitivity of clonogenic cells
  in the small intestine to low dose-rate irradiation.
authors:
- Hendry JH
- Broadbent DA
- Roberts SA
- Potten CS
journal: Int J Radiat Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1080/095530000138574
---

# Effects of deficiency in p53 or bcl-2 on the sensitivity of clonogenic cells in the small intestine to low dose-rate irradiation.
**Authors:** Hendry JH, Broadbent DA, Roberts SA, Potten CS
**Journal:** Int J Radiat Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1080/095530000138574](https://doi.org/10.1080/095530000138574)

## Abstract

1. Int J Radiat Biol. 2000 Apr;76(4):559-65. doi: 10.1080/095530000138574.

Effects of deficiency in p53 or bcl-2 on the sensitivity of clonogenic cells in 
the small intestine to low dose-rate irradiation.

Hendry JH(1), Broadbent DA, Roberts SA, Potten CS.

Author information:
(1)Experimental Radiation Oncology Group, Paterson Institute for Cancer 
Research, Christie Hospital NHS Trust, Manchester, UK. JHendry@PICR.MAN.AC.UK

PURPOSE: To study the role of p53 and bcl-2 in the response of the small 
intestine to irradiation delivered at low dose-rate.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Mice homozygous for p53 or bcl-2 deletion (-/-), their 
respective heterozygotes (+/-), and their wild-type littermates (+/+) including 
a previously used hybrid strain (B6D2F1), were irradiated to the whole-body 
using 60Co gamma-rays at 1 Gy h(-1). Crypt survival levels in the small 
intestine were measured at day 3 after the end of irradiation.
RESULTS: Crypt survival levels were higher in p53 -/- mice than in the other p53 
genotypes after 25-30 Gy, but not after lower or higher doses. Similar 
experiments with the three genotypes for bcl-2 status showed lower crypt 
survival after all doses used in the -/- mice, compared with the +/- and +/+ 
mice, which were similar in response. The marked degree of curvature in the 
survival curve observed for the p53 genotypes was also observed in B6D2F1 hybrid 
mice, was particularly striking in the p53 -/- mice, but was not seen to the 
same extent in the bcl-2 genotypes. The heterozygotes for p53 or for bcl-2 were 
nearer in response to their respective +/+ genotypes rather than the -/- 
genotypes.
CONCLUSION: The increased crypt survival levels at some radiation dose levels in 
the p53 nulls contrasts with the lack of change reported previously using 
irradiation at high dose-rate. The decreased survival in the bcl-2 nulls is 
consistent with the known 'survival' function of bcl-2, although bcl-2 
expression has not been detected immunohistochemically in this intestinal site. 
The marked degree of curvature in the dose-response curve at high dose levels 
for some genotypes was unexpected at this low dose-rate.

DOI: 10.1080/095530000138574
PMID: 10815637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
