---
pmid: '23392225'
title: FIP200 regulates targeting of Atg16L1 to the isolation membrane.
authors:
- Nishimura T
- Kaizuka T
- Cadwell K
- Sahani MH
- Saitoh T
- Akira S
- Virgin HW
- Mizushima N
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3589088
doi: 10.1038/embor.2013.6
---

# FIP200 regulates targeting of Atg16L1 to the isolation membrane.
**Authors:** Nishimura T, Kaizuka T, Cadwell K, Sahani MH, Saitoh T, Akira S, Virgin HW, Mizushima N
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/embor.2013.6](https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2013.6)
**PMC:** [PMC3589088](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3589088/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2013 Mar 1;14(3):284-91. doi: 10.1038/embor.2013.6. Epub 2013 Feb 8.

FIP200 regulates targeting of Atg16L1 to the isolation membrane.

Nishimura T(1), Kaizuka T, Cadwell K, Sahani MH, Saitoh T, Akira S, Virgin HW, 
Mizushima N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Tokyo Medical and Dental 
University, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

Autophagosome formation is a dynamic process that is strictly controlled by 
autophagy-related (Atg) proteins. However, how these Atg proteins are recruited 
to the autophagosome formation site or autophagic membranes remains poorly 
understood. Here, we found that FIP200, which is involved in proximal events, 
directly interacts with Atg16L1, one of the downstream Atg factors, in an Atg14- 
and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-independent manner. Atg16L1 deletion mutants, 
which lack the FIP200-interacting domain, are defective in proper membrane 
targeting. Thus, FIP200 regulates not only early events but also late events of 
autophagosome formation through direct interaction with Atg16L1.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2013.6
PMCID: PMC3589088
PMID: 23392225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Autophagosome formation is a dynamic process that is strictly controlled by autophagy-related (Atg) proteins. However, how these Atg proteins are recruited to the autophagosome formation site or autophagic membranes remains poorly understood. Here, we found that FIP200, which is involved in proximal events, directly interacts with Atg16L1, one of the downstream Atg factors, in an Atg14- and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-independent manner. Atg16L1 deletion mutants, which lack the FIP200-interacting domain, are defective in proper membrane targeting. Thus, FIP200 regulates not only early events but also late events of autophagosome formation through direct interaction with Atg16L1.

INTRODUCTION

Macroautophagy, hereafter referred to simply as autophagy, is an intracellular degradation system mediated by the autophagosome. Cytoplasmic materials, such as proteins, lipids, glycogens and organelles, are engulfed by an isolation membrane/phagophore, leading to the formation of a double-membrane autophagosome. Next, the autophagosome fuses with a lysosome, and the sequestered contents and the inner membranes are degraded [ 1 ]. So far, more than 30 autophagy-related ( ATG ) genes have been identified in yeast [ 2 , 3 ]. These include Atg1–10, 12–14, 16–18, 29 and 31 , most of which are conserved in higher eukaryotes and are essential for the formation of the autophagosome [ 1 , 3 ].

Following the comprehensive hierarchical analysis of yeast Atg proteins [ 4 ], the genetic hierarchy of mammalian Atg proteins has also been determined. The ULK1–Atg13–FIP200–Atg101 complex and Atg9A are independently recruited to the autophagosome formation site, and both are required for recruitment of the class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PtdIns3K) complex (Beclin1–Atg14(L)–Vps15–Vps34) [ 5 , 6 , 7 ]. PtdIns3K activity is required for further recruitment of the Atg2–WIPI and Atg12—Atg5–Atg16L1 complexes (— indicates a covalent attachment) [ 5 , 8 , 9 , 10 ]. Finally, LC3 is recruited in an Atg12—Atg5–Atg16L1-dependent manner [ 11 ].

Whereas WIPI proteins have a phosphoinositide-binding motif for recruitment to the autophagic membrane, Atg5, Atg12 and Atg16L1 do not have such typical membrane-binding motifs. Thus, it remains unknown how the Atg12—Atg5–Atg16L1 complex is recruited during starvation-induced autophagy. Furthermore, conflicting results have also been reported with regard to selective autophagy. In Salmonella xenophagy, the recruitment of LC3 and Atg5 to the Salmonella -containing vacuole is independent of PtdIns3K, FIP200 and Atg9A [ 12 ]. In Parkin-dependent mitophagy, LC3 can also be recruited to depolarized mitochondria even in FIP200 knockout (KO) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and Atg9A KO MEFs [ 6 ]. Therefore, the recruitment of Atg12—Atg5–Atg16L1 and LC3 to the autophagosome formation site appears to be complicated.

Here, we report the physical interaction between the Atg12—Atg5–Atg16L1 complex and the ULK1 complex, and describe a new mode of Atg16L1 targeting to the isolation membrane. Furthermore, we discuss the role of the carboxy-terminal WD-repeat domain of Atg16L1, which is absent in yeast Atg16.

DISCUSSION

We have shown that Atg16L1 directly interacts with FIP200 ( Fig 1 ) and that this interaction is important for the proper targeting of Atg16L1 to the isolation membrane ( Fig 5 ). During revision of this manuscript, the Atg16L1–FIP200 interaction and its importance in autophagy induction were also reported by Gammoh et al [ 21 ]. Considering that the Atg12—Atg5–Atg16L1 complex interacts with the ULK1–Atg13–FIP200–Atg101 complex independently of nutrient condition, it is reasonable to assume that these two units form a large complex in the cytoplasm, which then targets to the membrane as one complex. This suggests that the sequential action of components of the autophagy machinery could reflect the actions of different components of a large complex rather than the sequential recruitment of distinct and non-interacting protein complexes. These data are consistent with our findings of live imaging analysis, which shows that ULK1 and Atg5 are recruited to the same compartment with similar kinetics (Koyama-Honda et al , unpublished work).

Nonetheless, our results indicate that the 231–588 region of Atg16L1, including the FIP200-interacting domain and WD-repeat domain, is not essential for autophagy. As yeast Atg16 lacks this region, Atg16L1 might have acquired a new regulatory function in multicellular eukaryotes. To determine the precise function of the 231–588 region, we demonstrated that the Atg16L1(1–230) mutant localizes to punctate structures as well as a perinuclear structure in FIP200 KO MEFs, whereas full-length Atg16L1 shows a diffuse cytoplasmic pattern in the absence of FIP200 ( Fig 5 ). This result suggests the presence of autoinhibitory regulation ( Fig 5E ). We propose that the 231–588 region of Atg16L1 inhibits the membrane targeting of Atg16L1 and, following interaction of Atg16L1 with FIP200 via its 230–300 region, Atg16L1 can target to the membrane by removal of autoinhibition. FIP200 could also serve as a recruiter and ensure the specific targeting of Atg16L1 to the isolation membrane. Structural analysis of Atg16L1 will be required for further understanding of its precise molecular function.

METHODS

The experimental procedures are described in detail in the supplementary information online.

Cell culture. Atg14 flox/flox MEFs were obtained from Atg14 flox/flox mouse embryos [ 12 ], and immortalized with SV40 large T antigen using pEF321-T. Other cell lines are described in the supplementary information online.

Chemical crosslinking. Cells were harvested, resuspended in ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline containing 1 mM DSP and incubated on ice for 30 min.

Statistical analysis. Differences were statistically analysed using unpaired t -test or analysis of variance with Bonferroni/Dunn post hoc test.

Supplementary information is available at EMBO reports online ( http://www.emboreports.org ).
