---
pmid: '15571721'
title: 'Characterization of segments from the central region of BRCA1: an intrinsically
  disordered scaffold for multiple protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions?'
authors:
- Mark WY
- Liao JC
- Lu Y
- Ayed A
- Laister R
- Szymczyna B
- Chakrabartty A
- Arrowsmith CH
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.10.045
---

# Characterization of segments from the central region of BRCA1: an intrinsically disordered scaffold for multiple protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions?
**Authors:** Mark WY, Liao JC, Lu Y, Ayed A, Laister R, Szymczyna B, Chakrabartty A, Arrowsmith CH
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2004.10.045](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2004.10.045)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2005 Jan 14;345(2):275-87. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.10.045.

Characterization of segments from the central region of BRCA1: an intrinsically 
disordered scaffold for multiple protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions?

Mark WY(1), Liao JC, Lu Y, Ayed A, Laister R, Szymczyna B, Chakrabartty A, 
Arrowsmith CH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular and Structural Biology, Department of Medical 
Biophysics, Ontario Cancer Institute, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ont., 
Canada M5G 2M9.

The BRCA1 tumor suppressor gene encodes an 1863 amino acid gene product that is 
implicated in many cellular pathways including transcription, cell-cycle 
checkpoint control, apoptosis and DNA repair. Much attention has been focused on 
the structural and biochemical characterization of the N-terminal RING and 
tandem C-terminal BRCT domains of BRCA1. Here we used NMR spectroscopy in 
conjunction with CD spectroscopy and limited proteolysis to investigate the 
biophysical properties of the approximately 1500 residue central region of 
BRCA1. Our results show that although there are a few small, mildly 
protease-resistant regions, the majority of the BRCA1 central region lacks any 
pre-existing independently folded globular domains. Electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay and intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence experiments also demonstrate 
that, although intrinsically disordered, polypeptides from the central region 
are able to mediate interactions with DNA and p53 with affinities in the low 
micromolar range. This supports a model in which the central region may act as a 
long flexible scaffold for intermolecular interactions, thereby helping to 
integrate multiple signals in the DNA damage response pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.10.045
PMID: 15571721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
