---
pmid: '16890528'
title: Drosophila dorsal paired medial neurons provide a general mechanism for memory
  consolidation.
authors:
- Keene AC
- Krashes MJ
- Leung B
- Bernard JA
- Waddell S
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2006.06.022
---

# Drosophila dorsal paired medial neurons provide a general mechanism for memory consolidation.
**Authors:** Keene AC, Krashes MJ, Leung B, Bernard JA, Waddell S
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2006.06.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2006.06.022)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2006 Aug 8;16(15):1524-30. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2006.06.022.

Drosophila dorsal paired medial neurons provide a general mechanism for memory 
consolidation.

Keene AC(1), Krashes MJ, Leung B, Bernard JA, Waddell S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 364 
Plantation Street, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Memories are formed, stabilized in a time-dependent manner, and stored in neural 
networks. In Drosophila, retrieval of punitive and rewarded odor memories 
depends on output from mushroom body (MB) neurons, consistent with the idea that 
both types of memory are represented there. Dorsal Paired Medial (DPM) neurons 
innervate the mushroom bodies, and DPM neuron output is required for the 
stability of punished odor memory. Here we show that stable reward-odor memory 
is also DPM neuron dependent. DPM neuron expression of amnesiac (amn) in amn 
mutant flies restores wild-type memory. In addition, disrupting DPM 
neurotransmission between training and testing abolishes reward-odor memory, 
just as it does with punished memory. We further examined DPM-MB connectivity by 
overexpressing a DScam variant that reduces DPM neuron projections to the MB 
alpha, beta, and gamma lobes. DPM neurons that primarily project to MB alpha' 
and beta' lobes are capable of stabilizing punitive- and reward-odor memory, 
implying that both forms of memory have similar circuit requirements. Therefore, 
our results suggest that the fly employs the local DPM-MB circuit to stabilize 
punitive- and reward-odor memories and that stable aspects of both forms of 
memory may reside in mushroom body alpha' and beta' lobe neurons.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2006.06.022
PMID: 16890528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
