---
pmid: '18322145'
title: Expression analysis of genes associated with the induction of the carbon-concentrating
  mechanism in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.
authors:
- Yamano T
- Miura K
- Fukuzawa H
journal: Plant Physiol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC2330288
doi: 10.1104/pp.107.114652
---

# Expression analysis of genes associated with the induction of the carbon-concentrating mechanism in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.
**Authors:** Yamano T, Miura K, Fukuzawa H
**Journal:** Plant Physiol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1104/pp.107.114652](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.107.114652)
**PMC:** [PMC2330288](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2330288/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Physiol. 2008 May;147(1):340-54. doi: 10.1104/pp.107.114652. Epub 2008
Mar  5.

Expression analysis of genes associated with the induction of the 
carbon-concentrating mechanism in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.

Yamano T(1), Miura K, Fukuzawa H.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

Acclimation to varying CO2 concentrations and light intensities is associated 
with the monitoring of environmental changes by controlling genetic and 
physiological responses through CO2 and light signal transduction. While CO2 and 
light signals are indispensable for photosynthesis, and these environmental 
factors have been proposed as strongly associated with each other, studies 
linking these components are largely limited to work on higher plants. In this 
study, we examined the physiological characteristics of a green alga, 
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, exposed to various light intensities or CO2 
concentrations. Acclimation to CO2-limiting conditions by Chlamydomonas requires 
the induction of a carbon-concentrating mechanism (CCM) to allow the uptake of 
inorganic carbon (Ci) and increase the affinity for Ci. We revealed that the 
induction of the CCM is not solely dependent on absolute environmental Ci 
concentrations but is also affected by light intensity. Using a cDNA array 
containing 10,368 expressed sequence tags, we also obtained global expression 
profiles related to the physiological responses. The induction of several 
CCM-associated genes was strongly affected by high light as well as CO2 
concentrations. We identified novel candidates for Ci transporters and 
CO2-responsive regulatory factors whose expression levels were significantly 
increased during the induction of the CCM.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.107.114652
PMCID: PMC2330288
PMID: 18322145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Acclimation to varying CO 2 concentrations and light intensities is associated with the monitoring of environmental changes by controlling genetic and physiological responses through CO 2 and light signal transduction. While CO 2 and light signals are indispensable for photosynthesis, and these environmental factors have been proposed as strongly associated with each other, studies linking these components are largely limited to work on higher plants. In this study, we examined the physiological characteristics of a green alga, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii , exposed to various light intensities or CO 2 concentrations. Acclimation to CO 2 -limiting conditions by Chlamydomonas requires the induction of a carbon-concentrating mechanism (CCM) to allow the uptake of inorganic carbon (Ci) and increase the affinity for Ci. We revealed that the induction of the CCM is not solely dependent on absolute environmental Ci concentrations but is also affected by light intensity. Using a cDNA array containing 10,368 expressed sequence tags, we also obtained global expression profiles related to the physiological responses. The induction of several CCM-associated genes was strongly affected by high light as well as CO 2 concentrations. We identified novel candidates for Ci transporters and CO 2 -responsive regulatory factors whose expression levels were significantly increased during the induction of the CCM.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we revealed the dynamics and regulation of transcript abundance of known and unknown genes during acclimation to HL and/or LC stresses in the green alga Chlamydomonas . These expression profiles could be linked to changes in physiological characteristics, especially for the CCM, under different stress conditions.

Although the signals that induce the CCM have not been precisely determined, several candidates have been proposed ( Kaplan and Reinhold, 1999 ; Giordano et al., 2005 ). Recent work using Chlamydomonas revealed that the CO 2 -O 2 ratio did not play any role in the regulation of LC-inducible genes or in CCM induction ( Vance and Spalding, 2005 ). In cyanobacteria, it is reported that Ci concentrations and light intensities do not on their own trigger the expression of CCM-related genes but that a cooperative effect between light and CO 2 is required ( McGinn et al., 2003 ; Woodger et al., 2003 ). We have also studied the effect of changing light intensities and CO 2 concentrations on CCM induction in Chlamydomonas ( Figs. 1 and 2 ). First, we confirmed that there is a CO 2 -dependent inducible CO 2 uptake system in Chlamydomonas . Furthermore, under MC conditions, increases of affinity for Ci and CO 2 -exchange activity were apparently affected by light intensity. These results suggested that the induction of the CCM in Chlamydomonas was dependent not only on a decrease in Ci concentration in the culture medium but also on light intensity. Although increases in the level of CO 2 exchange activity were observed under both LC at ML and MC at HL conditions, the kinetic changes of CO 2 -exchange activities were different. The kinetics of the cells exposed to MC at HL conditions for 6 h were similar to those of the cells treated with LC at ML for 1 h, although the actual Ci concentrations were entirely different. This does not mean that the CCM induction under MC at HL conditions was delayed compared with that under LC at ML conditions, because the kinetics at 12 h under MC at HL conditions, when the cells were fully adapted to stress conditions, were the same as those at 6 h under LC at ML conditions (data not shown). Alternatively, these findings suggest that some CCM components are not active under MC at HL conditions. The genes that were induced only under LC at ML conditions seem to contribute to the full induction of the CCM.

Although the CCM induction seems to be enhanced by HL, it remains unclear whether the effect of HL is a direct or indirect effect on the induction process. It is possible that the redox potential of electron carrier(s) in the thylakoid membrane could be involved in the regulation of CCM. In relation to this, it has been shown that the plastoquinone pool is reduced by limiting CO 2 as well as HL ( Palmqvist et al., 1990 ; Iwai et al., 2007 ). It was also reported that a photosynthetic inhibitor, 3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea, blocks the expression of LC-inducible genes, such as Cah1 ( Dionisio-Sese et al., 1990 ) and Lci1 ( Im and Grossman, 2002 ), as well as the active accumulation of Ci ( Badger et al., 1980 ). Recently, proteomic approaches have also been applied to reveal the posttranslationally modified protein LCI5 under LC conditions. The LCI5 protein, which is localized at the stroma surface of the thylakoid membrane, is phosphorylated under LC conditions by redox-dependent protein kinase(s) ( Turkina et al., 2006 ). Although the function of LCI5 is unknown at present, posttranslational modification of proteins during the acclimation process to LC conditions, which cannot be identified by a DNA array analysis, could be associated with the CCM induction. Moreover, because we only know the total Ci concentrations in the medium, there also remains the possibility that the HL effect may be mediated through Ci depletion in the cells but not in the medium.

Further analysis demonstrated that the induction of the CCM in Synechococcus PCC7942 was very closely correlated with depletion of the internal Ci pool and that the full induction of the CCM requires oxygen-dependent processes, including photorespiration ( Woodger et al., 2005 ). In addition, there are many lines of evidence that photorespiratory activity is suppressed during the CCM, so a link between photorespiration and induction of the CCM is indicated ( Marcus et al., 1983 , 1992 ; Woodger et al., 2003 ). In our array analyses, 11 photorespiratory genes were significantly induced under LC at ML conditions. Although these genes, except for Shmt1 , were not regarded as inducible genes under MC at HL conditions on the basis of our criteria, the expression levels of four genes, Gdh1 (2.3-fold), Fhs (2.2-fold), Sgat (2.4-fold), and CarB (2.3-fold), were also slightly affected under MC at HL conditions (Supplemental Table S2). Moreover, considering that mutants with disruptions of Pgp1 or Gdh1 showed severe HC-requiring phenotypes ( Suzuki et al., 1990 ; Mamedov et al., 2001 ; Nakamura et al., 2005 ), CCM induction seems to operate in coordination with the function of photorespiration in Chlamydomonas . Comparison of expression profiles during the CCM derived from the wild type and photorespiratory mutants should provide us with a better understanding of the CCM induction signal.

We showed by our cDNA array experiments that the transcript levels of 40 genes were up-regulated under LC at ML and MC at HL conditions ( Table II ). Considering that the CCM was induced under MC at HL as well as LC at ML conditions, the genes we identified should be closely related to the functions of the CCM. Previously identified genes that were induced in CO 2 -limiting conditions were included in this group, confirming the quality of our array analyses. We also confirmed the induction of 23 genes and named these genes Lci7 to Lci29 ( Fig. 4A ). Interestingly, while several genes showed CCM1-dependent expression, other genes were only slightly induced in the C16 background. These results highlight at least two possibilities. One is that Chlamydomonas possesses a CCM1-independent CO 2 signal transduction system, and the other is that CCM1 functions as an amplifier of the CO 2 signal in the CO 2 signaling cascade in Chlamydomonas . From both viewpoints, it appears reasonable that genes such as Lci14 , Lci16 , and Lci25 , all encoding putative regulatory factors, were induced during CCM induction.

In this study, a substantial amount of information on the modulation of transcript levels during acclimation to HL and/or LC was obtained using a cDNA macroarray. Although the 10,368 EST clones spotted on our array membranes cover all genes present in our cDNA library ( Asamizu et al., 1999 , 2000 , 2004 ) and this was a larger analysis compared with all previous studies to identify CCM-related genes, our array membranes does not represent the entire transcriptome of Chlamydomonas . For example, 153 of 642 Chlamydomonas mRNA sequences deposited in GenBank were not spotted on our array membranes (e.g. Nar1 encoding nitrite transporter, Fea2 encoding Fe-assimilating protein 2, and Sabc encoding chloroplast ATP-binding protein). Considering that 15,413 protein-coding genes were predicted from the Chlamydomonas genome ( Merchant et al., 2007 ) and that Chlamydomonas also possesses a microRNA regulatory system ( Molnár et al., 2007 ), there could be additional factors responsible for the CCM induction and/or function. The results demonstrated the complex nature of plant acclimation to environmental stresses. The central goals of acclimation research include identifying stress-responsive genes, understanding their roles in plants, and ascertaining how environmental signals are transduced and associated. Much work has already been done to identify stress-responsive genes using global array analyses in Chlamydomonas . Henceforth, comparative transcriptome analyses comparing expression profiles between different stresses and different species should provide useful information for screening novel stress-responsive genes. Recent studies have revealed that gene-silencing methods can be applied to Chlamydomonas , and several stress-responsive genes have been characterized by loss-of-function analyses ( Schroda, 2006 ). As well, through further application of genomic approaches, such as proteome analyses ( Förster et al., 2006 ; Turkina et al., 2006 ), it should be possible to construct a detailed diagram of regulation in Chlamydomonas and to determine the roles of the regulatory networks in acclimation to multiple stresses.
