---
pmid: '17325035'
title: Loss of Gcn5 acetyltransferase activity leads to neural tube closure defects
  and exencephaly in mouse embryos.
authors:
- Bu P
- Evrard YA
- Lozano G
- Dent SY
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC1899977
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00066-07
---

# Loss of Gcn5 acetyltransferase activity leads to neural tube closure defects and exencephaly in mouse embryos.
**Authors:** Bu P, Evrard YA, Lozano G, Dent SY
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00066-07](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00066-07)
**PMC:** [PMC1899977](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1899977/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 May;27(9):3405-16. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00066-07. Epub 2007
Feb  26.

Loss of Gcn5 acetyltransferase activity leads to neural tube closure defects and 
exencephaly in mouse embryos.

Bu P(1), Evrard YA, Lozano G, Dent SY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas M. D. 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Gcn5 was the first transcription-related histone acetyltransferase (HAT) to be 
identified. However, the functions of this enzyme in mammalian cells remain 
poorly defined. Deletion of Gcn5 in mice leads to early embryonic lethality with 
increased apoptosis in mesodermal lineages. Here we show that deletion of p53 
allows Gcn5(-/-) embryos to survive longer, but Gcn5(-/-) p53(-/-) embryos still 
die in midgestation. Interestingly, embryos homozygous for point mutations in 
the Gcn5 catalytic domain survive significantly longer than Gcn5(-/-) or 
Gcn5(-/-) p53(-/-) mice. In contrast to Gcn5(-/-) embryos, Gcn5(hat/hat) embryos 
do not exhibit increased apoptosis but do exhibit severe cranial neural tube 
closure defects and exencephaly. Together, our results indicate that Gcn5 has 
important, HAT-independent functions in early development and that Gcn5 
acetyltransferase activity is required for cranial neural tube closure in the 
mouse.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00066-07
PMCID: PMC1899977
PMID: 17325035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Gcn5 was the first transcription-related histone acetyltransferase (HAT) to be identified. However, the functions of this enzyme in mammalian cells remain poorly defined. Deletion of Gcn5 in mice leads to early embryonic lethality with increased apoptosis in mesodermal lineages. Here we show that deletion of p53 allows Gcn5 −/− embryos to survive longer, but Gcn5 −/− p53 −/− embryos still die in midgestation. Interestingly, embryos homozygous for point mutations in the Gcn5 catalytic domain survive significantly longer than Gcn5 −/− or Gcn5 −/− p53 −/− mice. In contrast to Gcn5 −/− embryos, Gcn5 hat/hat embryos do not exhibit increased apoptosis but do exhibit severe cranial neural tube closure defects and exencephaly. Together, our results indicate that Gcn5 has important, HAT-independent functions in early development and that Gcn5 acetyltransferase activity is required for cranial neural tube closure in the mouse.

DISCUSSION

Our previous work revealed that paraxial mesoderm and chordamesoderm are specified but do not survive in Gcn5 −/− embryos due to increased apoptosis relative to wild-type or heterozygous littermates ( 38 ). We show here that elimination of the p53 tumor suppressor allows Gcn5 −/− embryos to survive longer and to develop somites. These results confirm our earlier conclusion that Gcn5 is not required for the specification of presomitic mesoderm but is required for the survival of this tissue lineage (in the presence of p53). We show here that loss of Gcn5 HAT activity is not sufficient to induce early embryo lethality but causes cranial NTDs, which culminate in exencephaly in mid- to late gestation. These findings demonstrate that Gcn5 HAT activity is required for proper neural tube closure in the mouse.

The phenotype of our Gcn5 −/− p53 −/− embryos was somewhat reminiscent of that reported by Yamauchi et al. for mouse mutants lacking Gcn5 C-terminal sequences, which encode the HAT domain and bromodomain ( 40 ). Mice homozygous for that Gcn5 allele were smaller than their wild-type or heterozygous littermates and appeared delayed in development, just as we see in the Gcn5 −/− p53 −/− double null mutants.

The fact that those mutant embryos and our original Gcn5 null embryos die much earlier than our Gcn5 hat/hat embryos indicates that Gcn5 has important developmental functions that are independent of its acetyltransferase activity. Otherwise, the catalytic site mutations would render a phenotype just as severe as that of Gcn5 deletion. Gcn5-containing complexes in mice likely contain multiple functional modules, as they do in yeast ( 2 , 19 , 37 ). Nonenzymatic proteins likely contribute essential functions to the complexes as well. In flies, for example, two Ada2 variants are assembled into separate Gcn5-containing complexes that have distinct roles during development ( 20 ). The complete absence of the Gcn5 protein in our Gcn5 −/− mice ( 38 ) and the presence of (at most) a truncated protein in mice expressing the Gcn5 allele of Yamauchi et al. ( 40 ) might affect the integrity of all Gcn5-containing complexes in these mutant embryos. In contrast, complex integrity is predicted to be intact in our Gcn5 hat/hat mice on the basis of the precedent of catalytically inactive Gcn5 proteins in yeast ( 6 , 35 ). We have not yet tested this prediction, as we do not have immortalized cell lines expressing this allele, and biochemical purification would be difficult, if not impossible, from the limited amounts of embryonic material or primary MEFs that we could obtain. The fact that the Gcn5 hat/hat embryos survive until E13.5 to E16.5, though, supports the idea that this allele preserves important Gcn5 complex functions. Interestingly, overexpression of catalytically inactive forms of Gcn5 in yeast caused dominant-negative effects, likely due to competition of the mutant and wild-type forms of the proteins for assembly into SAGA or other Gcn5-containing complexes. We have not observed any dominant-negative effects of the mutant allele in our Gcn5 hat/+ mice, which likely reflects that normal expression (i.e., not overexpression) of the mutant allele in these mutant mice.

Gcn5 is expressed ubiquitously in early mouse embryos, with the exception of the developing heart ( 38 ). It is somewhat surprising, then, that developmental defects in the Gcn5 hat/hat mutants appear to be limited to neural tissues. The normal development of other tissues may reflect Gcn5 redundancy with PCAF or overlapping functions with p300. PCAF null mice do not exhibit any abnormal phenotypes, so PCAF functions are not normally essential during development ( 38 , 40 ). However, Gcn5 −/− PCAF −/− double mutant embryos die much earlier than Gcn5 −/− single mutant embryos do, indicating PCAF shares some redundant functions with Gcn5 during development ( 38 ). Similarly, the phenotype of mice heterozygous for null alleles of both Gcn5 and p300 exhibit decreased viability relative to mice heterozygous for either single mutation, indicating that Gcn5 and p300 share some functions during embryogenesis ( 31 ). Mouse embryos with only one functional p300 allele exhibit an increased frequency of NTDs, indicating this HAT is also important for neural tube closure ( 42 ). Interestingly, mutations in the acetyltransferase (AT) domain of p300 are dominant, unlike our Gcn5 AT domain mutations. The presence of a single p300 AT mutant allele results in defective development of the lungs, cardiovascular system, and small intestine in mice ( 33 ). None of these organs are affected by loss of Gcn5 AT activity. Although these HATs physically interact and share some functions during development, they clearly have a number of distinct functions as well.

Neural tube closure is a complex and multistep process that involves lifting, bending, and fusion of the neural folds ( 10 ). Alterations in tissue proliferation or in cell survival affect this process, but our data indicate that Gcn5 hat/hat fibroblasts divide somewhat slowly in vitro and are not subject to increased apoptosis. It seems likely, then, that Gcn5 affects neural tube closure through effects on cell growth and/or gene transcription. Gcn5 functions as a transcriptional coactivator, and although we found that Gcn5 HAT activity is not required for expression of Twist , En - 1 , Shh , or Otx2 , it may regulate expression of one or more of the ∼100 other genes required for proper neural tube closure ( 10 , 45 ). This possibility will be addressed in future studies.

Interestingly, another subunit of Gcn5-containing complexes, Ataxin-7, is also implicated in neural functions ( 17 , 18 , 25 ). The Sca7 gene that encodes Ataxin-7 is subject to polyglutamine (poly-Q) expansions in humans, giving rise to spinocerebellar ataxia ( 15 ). Mouse models of poly-Q expansions of Sca7 exhibit many phenotypes similar to those found in the human disease, including ataxia and retinal defects ( 15 , 43 ). Current models suggest that the mutant proteins have adverse effects on transcriptional regulation of downstream target genes. Recent work indicates that such defects are associated with increased histone acetylation ( 17 ), but other studies indicate that poly-Q expanded Ataxin-7 proteins inhibit Gcn5 functions ( 25 , 30 ). Our current findings support the importance of Gcn5 acetyltransferase activity in normal neural development. The mutant Gcn5 alleles that we have generated will allow us to determine directly whether decreased Gcn5 protein levels or catalytic activity modulates the Sca7 poly-Q mutant phenotype in mice.
