---
pmid: '23267104'
title: Proteome-wide protein interaction measurements of bacterial proteins of unknown
  function.
authors:
- Meier M
- Sit RV
- Quake SR
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC3545810
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1210634110
---

# Proteome-wide protein interaction measurements of bacterial proteins of unknown function.
**Authors:** Meier M, Sit RV, Quake SR
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1210634110](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1210634110)
**PMC:** [PMC3545810](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3545810/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jan 8;110(2):477-82. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1210634110. Epub 2012 Dec 24.

Proteome-wide protein interaction measurements of bacterial proteins of unknown 
function.

Meier M(1), Sit RV, Quake SR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Physics and Bioengineering, Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Despite the enormous proliferation of bacterial genome data, surprisingly 
persistent collections of bacterial proteins have resisted functional 
annotation. In a typical genome, roughly 30% of genes have no assigned function. 
Many of these proteins are conserved across a large number of bacterial genomes. 
To assign a putative function to these conserved proteins of unknown function, 
we created a physical interaction map by measuring biophysical interaction of 
these proteins. Binary protein--protein interactions in the model organism 
Streptococcus pneumoniae (TIGR4) are measured with a microfluidic 
high-throughput assay technology. In some cases, informatic analysis was used to 
restrict the space of potential binding partners. In other cases, we performed 
in vitro proteome-wide interaction screens. We were able to assign putative 
functions to 50 conserved proteins of unknown function that we studied with this 
approach.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1210634110
PMCID: PMC3545810
PMID: 23267104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Despite the enormous proliferation of bacterial genome data, surprisingly persistent collections of bacterial proteins have resisted functional annotation. In a typical genome, roughly 30% of genes have no assigned function. Many of these proteins are conserved across a large number of bacterial genomes. To assign a putative function to these conserved proteins of unknown function, we created a physical interaction map by measuring biophysical interaction of these proteins. Binary protein-–protein interactions in the model organism Streptococcus pneumoniae (TIGR4) are measured with a microfluidic high-throughput assay technology. In some cases, informatic analysis was used to restrict the space of potential binding partners. In other cases, we performed in vitro proteome-wide interaction screens. We were able to assign putative functions to 50 conserved proteins of unknown function that we studied with this approach.

Discussion

The three screening rounds lead to 163 new identified protein interactions for the group of cPUFs from the SP TIGR4 strain. Fig. 4 A shows a network representation of the determined interactions. For 78 of 112 investigated cPUFs, at least one interaction partner was found. Before using an algorithm to assign functional annotations, we manually inspected the protein-interaction data for biological and functional consistency. One example is given here. The cPUFs SP1748, a predicted RNA binding protein, and SP1746 form an interaction cluster with SP1079, which belongs to the obg GTPase family. Obg family proteins play a role in the biogenesis of ribosomes, regulation of the cell cycle, and stress response ( 29 ). We found additional proteins interacting or located one edge next to SP1746 and SP1748, which are associated with ribosome modification and stress response, namely: SP0434, a stress-response protein; FtsJ, a protein methylating the 23S rRNA for ribosome regulation; nusB, a termination factor for transcription; the 50S ribosomal protein L21; and the transcription factor MarR with unknown activation response. Accumulation of similar functional groups was also found in other clusters. To increase the confidence of the acquired protein interactions we selected 16 protein interactions out of the positive set of the cPUFs and validated them off chip with classic ELISA in one pull-down direction only. Of the 16 protein interactions, 10 were positively identified in the ELISA experiments ( Table S4 ).

General functional annotation for the cPUFs was derived by applying the majority rule to the acquired protein-interaction set. For this process, we followed the method as described in ref. 4 , in which interaction between two nonfunctional classified proteins are taken into consideration. Although there are numerous alternative algorithms to the majority rule for assigning protein functions based on their interactions, we use the majority rule because of its simplicity coupled with high accuracy. cPUFs were classified into the main functional categories of the Clusters of Orthologous Groups (COG) (NCBI) nomenclature. Fig. 4 B summarizes all determined functional classes for the cPUFs (blue bars). The number of found members in each class is normalized to the total number of SP proteins currently assigned to the class (NCBI). The analysis leads to putative functional assignments of 48 cPUFs to COG categories. The cPUFs are almost evenly distributed over all of the general functional classes. This result supports the finding that the group of cPUFs as a whole resembles a randomly sampled collection of proteins. We further added to the bar graph in Fig. 4 B functional assignments for the cPUFs calculated with the majority rule based on the functional predicted genomic association partners (red bars). The overall representation of functional groups among the cPUFs is only slightly changed; however, the annotation COG class for a particular cPUF overlaps only for 42% of the investigated proteins.

The rapidly increasing number of full genome sequences and the correspondingly increasing number of ORFs with no functional information about the encoded protein are raising the demand for experimental methods to characterize protein function. None of the identified 163 SP cPUF protein interactions discovered in this work were reported in prior interaction data repositories. That only 42% of the in silico annotation overlap with the annotations resulted from the protein-interaction approach can be an indicator for uncertainties in the various approaches. Despite uncertainties and global assignments, our collected data are unique experimental data for these proteins, and the annotations can be used as a launching point for deeper functional experiments. The comparable degree of connectivity among the cPUFs compared with random protein samples indicates that the major signaling networks and functional groups common to many organisms have been exhaustively determined. Finally, we demonstrated that the microfluidic technology for measuring protein interactions is comparable with other high throughput technologies. Because of high error rates of the high-throughput protein interaction technologies, including the microfluidic chip technique, oversampling of datasets will still be required in future. The benchmark experiments of the microfluidic chip revealed a larger overlap with classic protein-interaction assay techniques than with Y2H and AP-MS techniques. Therefore, the chip technology is working orthogonal to the prevailing techniques with the advantage of lowering the experimental costs of protein–protein interaction sampling.
