---
pmid: '17334359'
title: Genome sequence of the lignocellulose-bioconverting and xylose-fermenting yeast
  Pichia stipitis.
authors:
- Jeffries TW
- Grigoriev IV
- Grimwood J
- Laplaza JM
- Aerts A
- Salamov A
- Schmutz J
- Lindquist E
- Dehal P
- Shapiro H
- Jin YS
- Passoth V
- Richardson PM
journal: Nat Biotechnol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nbt1290
---

# Genome sequence of the lignocellulose-bioconverting and xylose-fermenting yeast Pichia stipitis.
**Authors:** Jeffries TW, Grigoriev IV, Grimwood J, Laplaza JM, Aerts A, Salamov A, Schmutz J, Lindquist E, Dehal P, Shapiro H, Jin YS, Passoth V, Richardson PM
**Journal:** Nat Biotechnol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nbt1290](https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt1290)

## Abstract

1. Nat Biotechnol. 2007 Mar;25(3):319-26. doi: 10.1038/nbt1290. Epub 2007 Mar 4.

Genome sequence of the lignocellulose-bioconverting and xylose-fermenting yeast 
Pichia stipitis.

Jeffries TW(1), Grigoriev IV, Grimwood J, Laplaza JM, Aerts A, Salamov A, 
Schmutz J, Lindquist E, Dehal P, Shapiro H, Jin YS, Passoth V, Richardson PM.

Author information:
(1)US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory, One 
Gifford Pinchot Drive, Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA.

Xylose is a major constituent of plant lignocellulose, and its fermentation is 
important for the bioconversion of plant biomass to fuels and chemicals. Pichia 
stipitis is a well-studied, native xylose-fermenting yeast. The mechanism and 
regulation of xylose metabolism in P. stipitis have been characterized and genes 
from P. stipitis have been used to engineer xylose metabolism in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae. We have sequenced and assembled the complete genome of P. stipitis. 
The sequence data have revealed unusual aspects of genome organization, numerous 
genes for bioconversion, a preliminary insight into regulation of central 
metabolic pathways and several examples of colocalized genes with related 
functions. The genome sequence provides insight into how P. stipitis regulates 
its redox balance while very efficiently fermenting xylose under microaerobic 
conditions.

DOI: 10.1038/nbt1290
PMID: 17334359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
