---
pmid: '27203178'
title: The Yeast Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Routes Carbon Fluxes to Fuel Cell Cycle Progression.
authors:
- Ewald JC
- Kuehne A
- Zamboni N
- Skotheim JM
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4875507
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2016.02.017
---

# The Yeast Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Routes Carbon Fluxes to Fuel Cell Cycle Progression.
**Authors:** Ewald JC, Kuehne A, Zamboni N, Skotheim JM
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2016.02.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2016.02.017)
**PMC:** [PMC4875507](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4875507/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2016 May 19;62(4):532-45. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2016.02.017.

The Yeast Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Routes Carbon Fluxes to Fuel Cell Cycle 
Progression.

Ewald JC(1), Kuehne A(2), Zamboni N(3), Skotheim JM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(2)Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland; 
PhD Program Systems Biology, Life Science Zurich Graduate School, 8057 Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(3)Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 
Electronic address: skotheim@stanford.edu.

Cell division entails a sequence of processes whose specific demands for 
biosynthetic precursors and energy place dynamic requirements on metabolism. 
However, little is known about how metabolic fluxes are coordinated with the 
cell division cycle. Here, we examine budding yeast to show that more than half 
of all measured metabolites change significantly through the cell division 
cycle. Cell cycle-dependent changes in central carbon metabolism are controlled 
by the cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk1), a major cell cycle regulator, and the 
metabolic regulator protein kinase A. At the G1/S transition, Cdk1 
phosphorylates and activates the enzyme Nth1, which funnels the storage 
carbohydrate trehalose into central carbon metabolism. Trehalose utilization 
fuels anabolic processes required to reliably complete cell division. Thus, the 
cell cycle entrains carbon metabolism to fuel biosynthesis. Because the 
oscillation of Cdk activity is a conserved feature of the eukaryotic cell cycle, 
we anticipate its frequent use in dynamically regulating metabolism for 
efficient proliferation.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2016.02.017
PMCID: PMC4875507
PMID: 27203178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Cell division entails a sequence of processes whose specific demands for biosynthetic precursors and energy place dynamic requirements on metabolism. However, little is known about how metabolic fluxes are coordinated with the cell division cycle. Here, we examine budding yeast to show that over half of all measured metabolites change significantly through the cell division cycle. Cell cycle-dependent changes in central carbon metabolism are controlled by the cyclin-dependent kinase Cdk1, a major cell cycle regulator, and the metabolic regulator protein kinase A. At the G1/S transition, Cdk1 phosphorylates and activates the enzyme Nth1, which funnels the storage carbohydrate trehalose into central carbon metabolism. Trehalose utilization fuels anabolic processes required to reliably complete cell division. Thus, the cell cycle entrains carbon metabolism to fuel biosynthesis. Since the oscillation of Cdk-activity is a conserved feature of the eukaryotic cell cycle, we anticipate its frequent use in dynamically regulating metabolism for efficient proliferation.

Introduction

Across the kingdoms of life, cells coordinate metabolism, growth and division. This coordination increases the fitness of unicellular organisms living in changing environments, and allows multicellular organisms to shape and maintain their body plan. To coordinate metabolism, growth and division, cells have evolved extensive signaling networks that sense nutrient status. For example, receptors bind extracellular sugar to activate downstream molecules regulating growth and metabolism. In turn, metabolism gates the decision to divide. Cells deprived of essential nutrients will not pass the point of commitment to cell division, which is known as Start in yeast and the Restriction point in mammals ( Broach, 2012 ; Johnson and Skotheim, 2013 ; Wang and Proud, 2009 ; Zaman et al., 2008 ).

In proliferative conditions, cells committed to division proceed through a coordinated sequence of processes, including DNA replication, mitosis and cytokinesis, that are collectively known as the cell cycle ( Morgan, 2007 ). Each of these processes comes with specific and heterogeneous demands for biosynthetic precursors and energy, such as nucleotides for DNA synthesis ( Buchakjian and Kornbluth, 2010 ; Vander Heiden et al., 2009 ). Thus, cell cycle progression necessarily places dynamic requirements on metabolism. Regulating metabolic fluxes to satisfy these periodic demands is likely essential to maximize fitness and survival. However, little is known regarding if and how metabolic fluxes are temporally coordinated with the cell cycle.

The need to accurately allocate resources during different phases of growth and division may be most acute for single cell organisms growing in nutrient-poor environments. Nutrient limitation has been used to control the growth rate of budding yeast in chemostat cultivations to probe the connection between metabolism and growth. Such studies have examined how the rate of growth affects cell physiology, protein composition, transcription, and metabolism ( Brauer et al., 2008 ; Canelas et al., 2010 ; Castrillo et al., 2007 ; Gutteridge et al., 2010 ). Moreover, these studies link metabolism and growth rate to the activity of key signaling molecules including protein kinase A (PKA) and target of rapamycin (TOR) ( Castrillo et al., 2007 ). In addition to the examination of these steady-state relationships, chemostat cultivations have also been used to examine a dynamic phenomenon known as ‘metabolic cycling’ ( Burnetti et al., 2016 ; Klevecz et al., 2004 ; Kuenzi and Fiechter, 1969 ; Tu et al., 2005 ; Tu et al., 2007 ; Wittmann et al., 2005 ). Metabolically cycling populations of cells exhibit coordinated oscillations in metabolism and cell cycle phase, which suggests a link between these two processes. However, metabolic cycling is a complex phenomenon. Cell-to-cell communication of unknown origin synchronizes cell metabolism, drives periodic changes in the extracellular environment, and only partially synchronizes the cell cycle. In addition, the phase shift between cell and metabolic cycles varies in different conditions ( Klevecz et al., 2004 ; Slavov and Botstein, 2011 ; Tu, 2010 ) and metabolic cycles have even been shown in the absence of cell cycle progression ( Slavov et al., 2011 ). Thus, it remains unclear which changes in metabolism are driven by cell cycle progression and which might be intrinsic to a metabolic oscillator.

Here, to isolate the impact of cell cycle progression on cell metabolism, we examine dilute populations of cell cycle synchronized budding yeast. This allows us to exogenously control cell cycle progression and directly measure its effect on metabolism. We use dilute batch cultures to minimize the impact of cells on their environment, and thereby eliminate a potential feedback mechanism on cell growth and metabolism. To gain a global view of all changes in cellular metabolism, we employed untargeted metabolomics of cells growing on ethanol minimal medium. We found that more than half of the hundreds of detectable metabolites changed concentration significantly during the cell cycle, demonstrating that cell cycle progression per se drives large-scale changes in cell metabolism.

Metabolite variations through the cell cycle were not limited to biosynthetic pathways, but were also pronounced in central carbon metabolism. This included the cell cycle-dependent depletion of the storage carbohydrate trehalose. The storage carbohydrates trehalose and glycogen are highly abundant in slow growing cells and can serve as long-term carbon reserves during starvation ( Francois and Parrou, 2001 ). Trehalose also acts as a molecular chaperone and stress protectant ( Tapia and Koshland, 2014 ; Tapia et al., 2015 ). Moreover, several previous studies support a link between storage carbohydrate metabolism and the cell cycle. It was found that the length of G1 correlates with the amount of carbohydrates stored ( Brauer et al., 2008 ; Paalman et al., 2003 ; Sillje et al., 1997 ), budding often correlates with decreases in storage carbohydrates ( Kuenzi and Fiechter, 1969 , 1972 ; Muller et al., 2003 ; Sillje et al., 1997 ), and the in vitro activities of several storage metabolism enzymes correlate with cell cycle phase ( Vandoorn et al., 1988 ). Furthermore, trehalose utilization accelerates cell cycle entry when recovering from stationary phase ( Shi et al., 2010 ). Taken together, these observations suggest coordination of carbohydrate storage metabolism and the cell cycle. In support of this hypothesis, cell cycle regulation of lipid storage utilization also accelerates entry into the cell cycle from stationary phase ( Futcher, 2009 ; Kurat et al., 2009 ). However, no molecular mechanism linking storage carbohydrate metabolism and cell cycle control has yet been identified, and the function of storage carbohydrate oscillations remains unclear.

Here, we show that storage carbohydrate metabolism in budding yeast is directly regulated by the cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk1), whose activity oscillates through the cell cycle to coordinate major cell cycle events including DNA replication and mitosis ( Morgan, 2007 ). Thus, oscillation of Cdk1 activity can directly entrain fluxes in central carbon metabolism to meet the temporally specific biosynthetic demands of the cell cycle. Moreover, our work suggests that Cdk1-dependent storage carbohydrate oscillations allow cells to complete division in adverse nutrient conditions by providing an additional pool of biosynthetic precursors.

Discussion

Here, we showed that yeast metabolism is globally coordinated with cell cycle progression. By using synthetic promoters to express cell cycle regulators, we were able to synchronize cells and control cell cycle progression without perturbing their environment and their metabolism. We show that over 50% of the metabolome changes during cell cycle progression downstream of Start , the commitment point that triggers the G1/S transition. This causally links global changes in metabolism to cell cycle progression.

In addition to showing that cell cycle progression drives metabolic changes, we identified a specific mechanism through which the cell cycle regulatory network controls carbon metabolism. The main cell cycle kinase Cdk1 directly phosphorylates and activates the trehalase Nth1 to trigger the flux of storage carbohydrates into central carbon metabolism. While Nth1 activity also requires the nutrient signaling kinase PKA1, the timing of activation coincides with phosphorylation of the Cdk1-site at the G1/S transition. Moreover, Cdk1 activity is likely regulating other enzymes of the storage carbohydrate pathways. The enzyme responsible for glycogen utilization, Gph1, is likely activated at the G1/S transition and also contains a Cdk1 consensus site detected in the Cdk1 target screen ( Ubersax et al., 2003 ) ( Figure 2 ). We also note that trehalose concentrations do not increase during S/G2/M in mutant cells unable to utilize trehalose ( Figure 4B ). This implies that trehalose synthesis had been shut off at G1/S, which could be due to Cdk1 phosphorylating sites on the regulatory subunit of the trehalose synthase Tsl1 ( Table S2 ).

The requirement of both PKA and Cdk1 phosphorylation for Nth1 activity demonstrates that carbon storage metabolism integrates information from multiple signaling pathways. Mechanistically, this signal integration occurs through the unstructured N-terminal tail of Nth1. Phosphorylation by PKA enables the binding of the 14-3-3 protein Bmh1 to allow trehalose access to the catalytic site ( Macakova et al., 2013 ). Since the Cdk1 site on Nth1 is close to the two most important PKA sites, we speculate that S66 phosphorylation further enhances Bmh1 binding to increase trehalase activity. Since the importance of phospho-regulation of metabolic enzymes is becoming increasingly clear ( Oliveira et al., 2012 ; Schulz et al., 2014 ), we anticipate that combinatorial regulation by cell cycle and nutrient sensing kinases may be a widespread mechanism coordinating metabolism with cell cycle progression.

We suggest that the purpose of storage oscillations is to ensure a sufficient supply of carbon precursors for cell cycle-dependent biosynthesis of macromolecules in nutrient-poor environments. In support of this hypothesis, we showed that the ability to use the storage carbohydrate pool in S/G2/M phases of the cell cycle increases a cell’s chance of completing division and producing viable progeny when exposed to a deteriorating nutrient supply. In response to acute starvation, wild type cells are better able to complete cell division than mutants deficient in storage carbohydrate utilization. However, some of these storage mutant cells were still able to complete mitosis after starvation. This suggests the presence of additional carbon stores (such as glutamate or lipids) that may be accessed under extreme circumstances.

Our analysis of yeast responding to an acute removal of extracellular carbon is likely related to more physiological conditions such as growth on a finite amount of nutrients. In this case, yeast proliferate rapidly up to the depletion of extracellular nutrients. Eventually, cells reach stationary phase, where nearly all cells are arrested in G1 ( Werner-Washburne et al., 1993 ). Yet, how do cells support proliferation until complete depletion of the nutrient supply without more cells entering stationary phase in S, G2, or M phases of the cell cycle? We propose that the ability of cells to draw on carbohydrate stores to complete their division cycle allows them to continue proliferation up to the point of nutrient depletion without getting caught in an incomplete cell division cycle.

Our findings may also offer a new perspective on the extensively studied metabolic cycling phenomenon observed in chemostat cultivations, in which yeast cultures spontaneously synchronize their metabolism, cell cycle and transcriptional activity ( Burnetti et al., 2016 ; Slavov and Botstein, 2011 ; Tu et al., 2005 ). While our data does not explain the complex population dynamics in metabolically synchronized chemostats, we suspect that Cdk1 regulation of carbon metabolism might be one of the links between the metabolic and cell division cycles in these conditions as well.

Most generally, we identified major cell-cycle dependent changes throughout various anabolic and catabolic pathways. We therefore propose that the cell cycle control network regulates metabolism to meet the specific requirements of eukaryotic cell division. Consistent with this view, it was recently shown that the anaphase promoting complex regulates the stability of metabolic enzymes in HeLa cells ( Colombo et al., 2011 ), and that CDK regulates mitochondrial activity in yeast ( Harbauer et al., 2014 ) and mammalian cells ( Wang et al., 2014 ) in a cell-cycle dependent manner. Since the oscillation in CDK activity is a fundamental feature of eukaryotic cell division, we suspect that phosphorylation of specific enzymes by CDK generally contributes to how both cancerous and non-cancerous mammalian cells establish the distinct metabolism associated with growth and proliferation ( Buchakjian and Kornbluth, 2010 ; Fiske and Vander Heiden, 2012 ; Lunt and Vander Heiden, 2011 ).
