---
pmid: '19282482'
title: Regulation of DNMT1 stability through SET7-mediated lysine methylation in mammalian
  cells.
authors:
- Estève PO
- Chin HG
- Benner J
- Feehery GR
- Samaranayake M
- Horwitz GA
- Jacobsen SE
- Pradhan S
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC2654809
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0810362106
---

# Regulation of DNMT1 stability through SET7-mediated lysine methylation in mammalian cells.
**Authors:** Estève PO, Chin HG, Benner J, Feehery GR, Samaranayake M, Horwitz GA, Jacobsen SE, Pradhan S
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0810362106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0810362106)
**PMC:** [PMC2654809](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2654809/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Mar 31;106(13):5076-81. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0810362106. Epub 2009 Mar 12.

Regulation of DNMT1 stability through SET7-mediated lysine methylation in 
mammalian cells.

Estève PO(1), Chin HG, Benner J, Feehery GR, Samaranayake M, Horwitz GA, 
Jacobsen SE, Pradhan S.

Author information:
(1)New England Biolabs Incorporated, 240 County Road, Ipswich, MA 01938, USA.

Inheritance of epigenetic information encoded by cytosine DNA methylation 
patterns is crucial for mammalian cell survival, in large part through the 
activity of the maintenance DNA methyltransferase (DNMT1). Here, we show that 
SET7, a known histone methyltransferase, is involved in the regulation of 
protein stability of DNMT1. SET7 colocalizes and directly interacts with DNMT1 
and specifically monomethylates Lys-142 of DNMT1. Methylated DNMT1 peaks during 
the S and G(2) phases of the cell cycle and is prone to proteasome-mediated 
degradation. Overexpression of SET7 leads to decreased DNMT1 levels, and 
siRNA-mediated knockdown of SET7 stabilizes DNMT1. These results demonstrate 
that signaling through SET7 represents a means of DNMT1 enzyme turnover.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0810362106
PMCID: PMC2654809
PMID: 19282482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Inheritance of epigenetic information encoded by cytosine DNA methylation patterns is crucial for mammalian cell survival, in large part through the activity of the maintenance DNA methyltransferase (DNMT1). Here, we show that SET7, a known histone methyltransferase, is involved in the regulation of protein stability of DNMT1. SET7 colocalizes and directly interacts with DNMT1 and specifically monomethylates Lys-142 of DNMT1. Methylated DNMT1 peaks during the S and G 2 phases of the cell cycle and is prone to proteasome-mediated degradation. Overexpression of SET7 leads to decreased DNMT1 levels, and siRNA-mediated knockdown of SET7 stabilizes DNMT1. These results demonstrate that signaling through SET7 represents a means of DNMT1 enzyme turnover.

Discussion

Our results suggest that signaling through SET7-mediated methylation of DNMT1 regulates proteasome-mediated degradation of DNMT1. The DNMT1K142me degradation mechanism is in contrast with SET7-mediated TAF-10 and p53 methylation. In both cases, lysine methylation is required for their structural/functional stabilization. Monomethyl TAF10 has an increased affinity for RNA polymerase II and is involved in preinitiation complex formation on some TAF10-dependent genes. Similarly, monomethylation of the carboxyl-terminus lysine in p53 protein increases its structural stability perhaps via recruiting monomethyl p53 binding protein that can interfere with MDM2-mediated ubiquitination. Furthermore, Set7-mediated methylation regulates the expression of p53 target genes in a manner dependent on p53 methylation.

Although it is clear that DNMT1 is an in vivo methylation target of SET7, the in vivo role of DNMT1 methylation is thus far unclear. A mouse knockout of Set7 was recently reported to show normal development through adulthood. However, Set7 null cells did not follow normal cell cycle arrest after DNA damage, implying deregulation of cell cycle check points ( 30 ). Because our data suggest that DNMT1 would lack methylation and be more stable in the SET7 deletion strains, and yet no dramatic phenotypic consequences are seen, these results suggest that DNMT1 methylation may play a subtle role in DNA methylation control, or one that is only observed under certain conditions. One speculative hypothesis for the function of DNMT1 methylation could be its clearance from methylated promoters when a previously methylated and silent gene is first becoming expressed. In this case, SET7-mediated DNMT1 degradation may not be strictly required for gene activation, but might alter the kinetics of the process. An analogous situation would be H3K4 methylation in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Even though SET1 (the H3K4 methyltransferase) deletion strains grow normally, the kinetics of gene activation is slower than in the wild type ( 31 ). Recently, loss of genomic methylation in targeted deletion of LSD1 ( Aof 2) in mouse ES cells was shown ( 32 ). In that study, the loss of DNA methylation correlated with degradation of Dnmt1 caused by K1096 methylation by Set7. However, in human DNMT1 K142 is the major target site for SET7 resulting in its degradation. Thus, both mouse and human enzyme may follow the same mechanistic pathway for DNMT1 degradation via different lys methylation. Although future research should help clarify the SET7 target amino acid residues and the role of DNMT1 methylation, the data reported here suggest that SET7-mediated degradation of DNMT1 and hypomethylation of the genome may be a fine-tuning mechanism resulting in epigenetic modulation of gene expression.
