---
pmid: '11519011'
title: Mutations in the 3beta-hydroxysterol Delta24-reductase gene cause desmosterolosis,
  an autosomal recessive disorder of cholesterol biosynthesis.
authors:
- Waterham HR
- Koster J
- Romeijn GJ
- Hennekam RC
- Vreken P
- Andersson HC
- FitzPatrick DR
- Kelley RI
- Wanders RJ
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2001'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1226055
doi: 10.1086/323473
---

# Mutations in the 3beta-hydroxysterol Delta24-reductase gene cause desmosterolosis, an autosomal recessive disorder of cholesterol biosynthesis.
**Authors:** Waterham HR, Koster J, Romeijn GJ, Hennekam RC, Vreken P, Andersson HC, FitzPatrick DR, Kelley RI, Wanders RJ
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1086/323473](https://doi.org/10.1086/323473)
**PMC:** [PMC1226055](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1226055/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Oct;69(4):685-94. doi: 10.1086/323473. Epub 2001 Aug 22.

Mutations in the 3beta-hydroxysterol Delta24-reductase gene cause 
desmosterolosis, an autosomal recessive disorder of cholesterol biosynthesis.

Waterham HR(1), Koster J, Romeijn GJ, Hennekam RC, Vreken P, Andersson HC, 
FitzPatrick DR, Kelley RI, Wanders RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical Center, 
University of Amsterdam, 1100 DE Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
h.r.waterham@amc.uva.nl

Desmosterolosis is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by multiple 
congenital anomalies. Patients with desmosterolosis have elevated levels of the 
cholesterol precursor desmosterol, in plasma, tissue, and cultured cells; this 
abnormality suggests a deficiency of the enzyme 3beta-hydroxysterol 
Delta24-reductase (DHCR24), which, in cholesterol biosynthesis, catalyzes the 
reduction of the Delta24 double bond of sterol intermediates. We identified the 
human DHCR24 cDNA, by the similarity between the encoded protein and a recently 
characterized plant enzyme--DWF1/DIM, from Arabidopsis thaliana--catalyzing a 
different but partially similar reaction in steroid/sterol biosynthesis in 
plants. Heterologous expression, in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, of the 
DHCR24 cDNA, followed by enzyme-activity measurements, confirmed that it encodes 
DHCR24. The encoded DHCR24 protein has a calculated molecular weight of 60.1 kD, 
contains a potential N-terminal secretory-signal sequence as well as at least 
one putative transmembrane helix, and is a member of a recently defined family 
of flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD)-dependent oxidoreductases. Conversion of 
desmosterol to cholesterol by DHCR24 in vitro is strictly dependent on reduced 
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate and is increased twofold by the 
addition of FAD to the assay. The corresponding gene, DHCR24, was identified by 
database searching, spans approximately 46.4 kb, is localized to chromosome 
1p31.1-p33, and comprises nine exons and eight introns. Sequence analysis of 
DHCR24 in two patients with desmosterolosis revealed four different missense 
mutations, which were shown, by functional expression, in yeast, of the patient 
alleles, to be disease causing. Our data demonstrate that desmosterolosis is a 
cholesterol-biosynthesis disorder caused by mutations in DHCR24.

DOI: 10.1086/323473
PMCID: PMC1226055
PMID: 11519011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Desmosterolosis is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by multiple congenital anomalies. Patients with desmosterolosis have elevated levels of the cholesterol precursor desmosterol, in plasma, tissue, and cultured cells; this abnormality suggests a deficiency of the enzyme 3β-hydroxysterol Δ 24 -reductase (DHCR24), which, in cholesterol biosynthesis, catalyzes the reduction of the Δ 24 double bond of sterol intermediates. We identified the human DHCR24 cDNA, by the similarity between the encoded protein and a recently characterized plant enzyme—DWF1/DIM, from Arabidopsis thaliana —catalyzing a different but partially similar reaction in steroid/sterol biosynthesis in plants. Heterologous expression, in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, of the DHCR24 cDNA, followed by enzyme-activity measurements, confirmed that it encodes DHCR24. The encoded DHCR24 protein has a calculated molecular weight of 60.1 kD, contains a potential N-terminal secretory-signal sequence as well as at least one putative transmembrane helix, and is a member of a recently defined family of flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD)–dependent oxidoreductases. Conversion of desmosterol to cholesterol by DHCR24 in vitro is strictly dependent on reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate and is increased twofold by the addition of FAD to the assay. The corresponding gene, DHCR24, was identified by database searching, spans ∼46.4 kb, is localized to chromosome 1p31.1-p33, and comprises nine exons and eight introns. Sequence analysis of DHCR24 in two patients with desmosterolosis revealed four different missense mutations, which were shown, by functional expression, in yeast, of the patient alleles, to be disease causing. Our data demonstrate that desmosterolosis is a cholesterol-biosynthesis disorder caused by mutations in DHCR24.

Introduction

In recent years, several inherited disorders have been linked to enzyme defects in the isoprenoid/cholesterol biosynthetic pathway, by the discovery of abnormally increased levels of intermediate metabolites in patients, followed by the demonstration that there are disease-causing mutations in genes encoding the implicated enzymes (Schafer et al. 1992 ; Fitzky et al. 1998 ; Wassif et al. 1998 ; Waterham et al. 1998 ; Braverman et al. 1999 ; Derry et al. 1999 ; Drenth et al. 1999 ; Houten et al. 1999 ; Konig et al. 2000 ). The isoprenoid/cholesterol biosynthetic pathway produces numerous molecules that are involved in a variety of cell processes, including cell growth and differentiation, glycosylation, signal transduction, and electron transport (Goldstein and Brown 1990 ). Most currently identified enzyme defects specifically affect the biosynthesis of cholesterol and lead to multiple congenital, skeletal, and/or skin abnormalities (Herman 2000 ; Kelley 2000 ; Kelley and Hennekam 2000 ; Waterham and Wanders 2000 ).

Isoprenoid/cholesterol biosynthesis starts with the C 2 compound acetyl-CoA, which, in a series of six different enzyme reactions, is converted to isopentenyl-PP, the basic C 5 isoprene unit used for the synthesis of all subsequent isoprenoids (Goldstein and Brown 1990 ; Waterham and Wanders 2000 ). The first intermediate committed to the production of sterols is C 30 squalene (composed of six isoprene units), which, after cyclization, is converted to lanosterol (4,4,14α-trimethylcholesta-8(9),24-dien-3β-ol). To eventually produce cholesterol from lanosterol, a series of enzyme reactions is required, including one demethylation at C-14, two demethylations at C-4, one isomerization of Δ 8(9) to Δ 7 , three reductions of the Δ 24 , Δ 14 , and Δ 7 double bonds, and one desaturation between C-5 and C-6 ( fig. 1 A ). Although the various enzyme reactions required for the conversion of lanosterol to cholesterol have been established, their preferred sequence may vary. Consequently, two major routes involving the same enzymes have been proposed that postulate, as the ultimate precursor of cholesterol, either 7-dehydrocholesterol (cholesta-5,7-dien-3β-ol) or desmosterol (cholesta-5,24-dien-3β-ol), depending mainly on the timing of the reduction of the Δ 24 double bond (Frantz and Schroepfer 1967 ; Bae and Paik 1997 ; Waterham and Wanders 2000 ). It is assumed that the various enzymes involved in the conversion of lanosterol to cholesterol, are rather nonspecific and can handle different intermediates.

The majority of the human genes encoding the various enzymes involved in cholesterol biosynthesis have been identified only very recently, as a corollary of the identification and elucidation of the biochemical and molecular bases of inherited defects of cholesterol biosynthesis. In most cases, the gene identification was aided by the similarity, in sequence and/or function, between the human proteins and their orthologs in other organisms, including yeasts and plants.

We now report the molecular basis of autosomal recessive desmosterolosis (MIM 602398 ), a severe multiple-congenital-anomaly syndrome caused by a defect in cholesterol biosynthesis, as indicated, in patients, by elevated plasma and tissue levels of the cholesterol precursor desmosterol (FitzPatrick et al. 1998 ). Since this biochemical abnormality suggested a deficiency of the cholesterol-biosynthetic enzyme 3β-hydroxysterol Δ 24 -reductase (DHCR24), we undertook to identify the human gene encoding this enzyme. Although no sterol Δ 24 -reductase gene had been reported for any organism, we were able to identify the human gene by the sequence similarity between its encoded protein and a recently characterized plant enzyme catalyzing a different but partially similar reaction in steroid/sterol biosynthesis in plants. Mutation analysis of the DHCR24 gene in two patients with desmosterolosis revealed different disease-causing mutations, as demonstrated by expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Discussion

In this study, we have reported the human DHCR24 gene, identified by the similarity between the DHCR24 protein and the recently characterized DWARF1/DIMINUTO gene product of A. thaliana, which is involved in plant steroid/sterol biosynthesis. We have confirmed that DHCR24 encodes DHCR24, by functional expression, in S. cerevisiae, of the DHCR24 cDNA. In addition, we have demonstrated—by expression, in S. cerevisiae, of alleles in patients—that enzyme-inactivating mutations in DHCR24 are the cause of the cholesterol-biosynthesis disorder desmosterolosis.

No sequence similarity between DHCR24 and other, previously identified human, plant, or yeast sterol reductases exists, which, in retrospect, explains the difficulty of identifying both the protein and its encoding gene. Except for DHCR24, all sterol reductases—including sterol Δ 7 -, sterol Δ 14 -, and sterol Δ 24(28) -reductases—belong to one family of proteins sharing a high degree of sequence homology. These sterol reductases all have been localized to the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum, and all require NADPH for their activities; both of these conditions are also true of DHCR24. As suggested by the presence of a putative secretory-signal sequence, subcellular localization and topology studies of A. thaliana DWF1 revealed a localization to the endoplasmic-reticulum membrane, with the carboxy terminus oriented toward the cytoplasm (Klahre et al. 1998 ). In addition, Greeve et al. ( 2000 ) recently reported a localization, to the endoplasmic-reticulum membrane, of the human seladin-1 protein, which appears identical to DHCR24 (also see below).

As is the case for the activities of the other sterol reductases, the conversion of desmosterol to cholesterol by DHCR24 appears strictly NADPH dependent, although no common consensus sequence for an NADPH-binding site can be found in the DHCR24 amino acid sequence. In contrast, DHCR24 appears to be a member of a recently defined family of FAD-dependent oxidoreductases that all share a conserved domain postulated to be involved in either covalent or noncovalent binding of FAD. Although FAD could not substitute for NADPH in our enzyme-activity assay, we noted a twofold increase in activity after the addition of FAD, strongly suggesting that, in the case of DHCR24, FAD is noncovalently linked.

Desmosterolosis is only the fourth inherited disorder of postsqualene cholesterol biosynthesis for which the molecular basis has been solved; the first three include autosomal recessive Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS [MIM 270400 ]), which is caused by deficiency of DHCR7 (encoded by the DHCR7 gene, at 11q13 [Fitzky et al. 1998 ; Wassif et al. 1998 ; Waterham et al. 1998 ; Witsch-Baumgartner et al. 2000 ]), and the X-linked dominant inherited disorders Conradi-Hünermann-Happle syndrome (CDPX2 [MIM 302960 ]) and c ongenital h emidysplasia with i chthyosis and l imb d efects (CHILD) syndrome (MIM 308050 ), which are caused by deficiencies of sterol Δ 8 -Δ 7 isomerase (encoded by the EBP gene, at Xp11.22-23 [Braverman et al. 1999 ; Derry et al. 1999 ]) and of sterol C-4 demethylase (encoded by the NSDHL gene, at Xq28 [Konig et al. 2000 ]), respectively. SLOS is clinically characterized by multiple morphogenic and congenital abnormalities, including craniofacial, organ, limb/skeletal, and urogenital anomalies, as well as by growth retardation and mental retardation (Kelley 2000 ; Kelley and Hennekam 2000 ; Waterham and Wanders 2000 ). Both CDPX2 and CHILD syndrome clinically present with skeletal and skin abnormalities, including stippling of epiphyses, rhizomelia (shortening of long bones), ichthyosis, and hyperkeratosis (Herman 2000 ; Kelley 2000 ). The two patients with desmosterolosis exhibit clinical features of all three aforementioned syndromes. Since the clinical presentation of both patients was, however, rather different, the identification of additional patients will be required for further delineation of the clinical phenotype of desmosterolosis.

The overlap, in clinical phenotype, between the different cholesterol-biosynthesis disorders suggests a common mechanism underlying their pathogenesis. Indeed, the involvement of cholesterol in embryonic development and morphogenesis, recently discovered by its role in the hedgehog-protein signal–transduction pathways, provides a potential key to the pathogenesis of these disorders (Porter et al. 1996 ; Hammerschmidt et al. 1997 ; Mann and Beachy 2000 ; McMahon 2000 ; Villavicencio et al. 2000 ). The hedgehog proteins comprise a family of secreted embryonic-signaling molecules involved, in both vertebrates and invertebrates, in embryonic patterning. In higher vertebrates, including humans, three different hedgehog proteins (Sonic, Desert, and Indian) have been identified and have been implicated in an increasing number of different developmental processes (Hammerschmidt et al. 1997 ; McMahon 2000 ; Villavicencio et al. 2000 ), many of which are defective in patients with one of the cholesterol-biosynthesis disorders. Although the exact role of cholesterol in the pathways is still elusive and may occur at multiple levels (i.e., hedgehog-protein–signal generation, reception, transduction, and/or transport), it has been assumed that perturbations of these pathways provide an explanation of most of the congenital abnormalities associated with these disorders.

Recently, a human DWF1 homolog was reported to exhibit a relatively low expression in affected neurons of patients with Alzheimer disease (AD) (Greeve et al. 2000 ). This homolog, which, because of its lack of physiological function, was named “seladin-1” (for sel ective A lzheimer d isease in dicator 1 ), appears identical to DHCR24. Overexpression of seladin-1 in PC12 cells and in human neuroglioma H4 cells resulted in resistance against AD-associated amyloid-β peptide–induced toxicity and in protection from apoptotic cell death, respectively. On the basis of these in vitro observations, it was suggested that high seladin-1 levels might delay and/or prevent neurodegeneration in AD (Greeve et al. 2000 ); however, given our current demonstration of seladin-1/DHCR24’s function in cholesterol biosynthesis, it is unclear how to interpret these results, in light of recent data indicating that, in fact, a reduction of cholesterol biosynthesis leads to a decrease in the production and accumulation of amyloid-β peptide and, as a consequence, to the development of AD (Wolozin et al. 2000 ; Fassbender et al. 2001 ; Kojro et al. 2001 ; Wolozin 2001 ).
