---
pmid: '34813358'
title: IFNAR1 and IFNAR2 play distinct roles in initiating type I interferon-induced
  JAK-STAT signaling and activating STATs.
authors:
- Shemesh M
- Lochte S
- Piehler J
- Schreiber G
journal: Sci Signal
year: '2021'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC12182326
doi: 10.1126/scisignal.abe4627
---

# IFNAR1 and IFNAR2 play distinct roles in initiating type I interferon-induced JAK-STAT signaling and activating STATs.
**Authors:** Shemesh M, Lochte S, Piehler J, Schreiber G
**Journal:** Sci Signal (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scisignal.abe4627](https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.abe4627)
**PMC:** [PMC12182326](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12182326/)

## Abstract

1. Sci Signal. 2021 Nov 23;14(710):eabe4627. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.abe4627. Epub
 2021 Nov 23.

IFNAR1 and IFNAR2 play distinct roles in initiating type I interferon-induced 
JAK-STAT signaling and activating STATs.

Shemesh M(1), Lochte S(2), Piehler J(2), Schreiber G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.
(2)Department of Biology and Center of Cellular Nanoanalytics, University of 
Osnabrück, 49076 Osnabrück, Germany.

Type I interferons bind to cell surface receptors composed of the subunits 
IFNAR1 and IFNAR2, the intracellular domains (ICDs) of which are associated with 
the kinases TYK2 and JAK1, respectively. Ligand binding results in the 
cross-phosphorylation of TYK2 and JAK1, which then phosphorylate tyrosine 
residues in the ICDs of the receptor subunits and members of the STAT family of 
transcription factors. The phosphorylated STATs migrate to the nucleus and drive 
transcription. We analyzed receptor mutants in knockout cells to study the 
functional importance of various regions of the receptor ICDs. For IFNAR1, only 
the TYK2 binding site in the ICD was required for signaling. In contrast, 
successive truncations of the ICD of IFNAR2 proportionally decreased 
constitutive STAT binding, STAT phosphorylation, and target gene activation. 
These findings fit a model in which nonsuccessive stretches along the ICD 
interact with STATs. Tyrosine residues in the IFNAR1 ICD were not required for 
signaling, and single tyrosine mutations in the IFNAR2 ICD did not affect signal 
activation. However, simultaneous mutation of all the tyrosine residues in 
IFNAR2-ICD reduced STAT phosphorylation, STAT-mediated transcriptional 
activation, and antiviral activity but not constitutive STAT2 binding. We 
suggest that tyrosine phosphorylation on IFNAR2-ICD drives the dissociation of 
phosphorylated STATs, thus maintaining high signaling flux.

DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.abe4627
PMID: 34813358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

IntroductionSince the introduction of immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) in 2014, the survival of patients with advanced melanoma has radically increased. These T cell-driven therapies achieve clinical success in numerous patients; however, an overwhelming number of patients do not realize an initial or long-term response.1,2,3,4 These therapies, including checkpoint blockade, adoptive T cell transfer, and dendritic cell vaccination, depend on the surface display of tumor-related or tumor-specific antigens via major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I) molecules. Loss of MHC-I expression is observed in >60% of patients with metastatic melanoma resistant to ICB.5,6,7 Genes known to impact the levels of MHC-I are transcriptionally and epigenetically regulated by a variety of cis-acting transcription factors (e.g., IRF1, nuclear factor κB, and NLRC5), chromatin-modifying enzymes (e.g., histone H3K27 methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2 [EZH2]), and histone epigenetic modifications (e.g., bivalent H3K27me3, H3K4me3) that, in normal cells, serve to mediate self-recognition and autoimmunity.8,9 Nevertheless, by exploiting partially understood pathways, cancer cells can “tune” regulation of the MHC-I antigen-processing pathway to decrease MHC-I and antigen presentation, favoring immune evasion via lack of CD8+ cytotoxic T cell recognition.9,10 The frequent downregulation of MHC-I antigen presentation in solid tumors greatly abrogates the effectiveness of immunotherapy treatments. Understanding the foundations of immune evasion is crucial to circumventing therapy resistance and improving the therapeutic response of patients with melanoma.The standard of care for advanced melanoma often includes ICB, most notably anti-CTLA4 and anti-programmed cell death 1 antibody therapy. Because the efficacy of ICB therapy relies on natural immune cell function, the discrepancy in ICB effectiveness between patients who clinically respond to therapy (“responders”) and those who fail to respond (“non-responders”) can be attributed, in part, to cellular interactions within the solid tumor microenvironment (TME).11,12 Although tumor immunogenicity is directly linked to immune responsiveness, the mechanisms by which conditions of the TME dictate immune recognition are not fully understood. The TME has been characterized as a harsh and competitive landscape, introducing metabolic stressors including hypoxia, glucose deprivation, and toxic byproduct accumulation.13,14,15 It has recently come to light that regulation of the MHC-I antigen-processing pathway, and thereby tumor immune recognition, depends greatly on the stress and metabolic state of the tumor.8,16,17 Though it is apparent that the metabolically stressful conditions of the TME contribute to immunotherapy response in melanoma, the mechanisms behind the metabolic dysregulation of MHC-I and antigen processing machinery are unknown. In this study, we examine the impact of metabolic adaptation induced by prolonged glucose deprivation, as found in the TME, on MHC-I presentation and overall immunogenicity of melanoma cells. We find that metabolic adaptation of melanoma cells results in loss of EZH2, restoration of MHC-I expression and antigen presentation, and an increase in T cell-mediated tumor killing.

Introduction

Since the introduction of immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) in 2014, the survival of patients with advanced melanoma has radically increased. These T cell-driven therapies achieve clinical success in numerous patients; however, an overwhelming number of patients do not realize an initial or long-term response.1,2,3,4 These therapies, including checkpoint blockade, adoptive T cell transfer, and dendritic cell vaccination, depend on the surface display of tumor-related or tumor-specific antigens via major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I) molecules. Loss of MHC-I expression is observed in >60% of patients with metastatic melanoma resistant to ICB.5,6,7 Genes known to impact the levels of MHC-I are transcriptionally and epigenetically regulated by a variety of cis-acting transcription factors (e.g., IRF1, nuclear factor κB, and NLRC5), chromatin-modifying enzymes (e.g., histone H3K27 methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2 [EZH2]), and histone epigenetic modifications (e.g., bivalent H3K27me3, H3K4me3) that, in normal cells, serve to mediate self-recognition and autoimmunity.8,9 Nevertheless, by exploiting partially understood pathways, cancer cells can “tune” regulation of the MHC-I antigen-processing pathway to decrease MHC-I and antigen presentation, favoring immune evasion via lack of CD8+ cytotoxic T cell recognition.9,10 The frequent downregulation of MHC-I antigen presentation in solid tumors greatly abrogates the effectiveness of immunotherapy treatments. Understanding the foundations of immune evasion is crucial to circumventing therapy resistance and improving the therapeutic response of patients with melanoma.

The standard of care for advanced melanoma often includes ICB, most notably anti-CTLA4 and anti-programmed cell death 1 antibody therapy. Because the efficacy of ICB therapy relies on natural immune cell function, the discrepancy in ICB effectiveness between patients who clinically respond to therapy (“responders”) and those who fail to respond (“non-responders”) can be attributed, in part, to cellular interactions within the solid tumor microenvironment (TME).11,12 Although tumor immunogenicity is directly linked to immune responsiveness, the mechanisms by which conditions of the TME dictate immune recognition are not fully understood. The TME has been characterized as a harsh and competitive landscape, introducing metabolic stressors including hypoxia, glucose deprivation, and toxic byproduct accumulation.13,14,15 It has recently come to light that regulation of the MHC-I antigen-processing pathway, and thereby tumor immune recognition, depends greatly on the stress and metabolic state of the tumor.8,16,17 Though it is apparent that the metabolically stressful conditions of the TME contribute to immunotherapy response in melanoma, the mechanisms behind the metabolic dysregulation of MHC-I and antigen processing machinery are unknown. In this study, we examine the impact of metabolic adaptation induced by prolonged glucose deprivation, as found in the TME, on MHC-I presentation and overall immunogenicity of melanoma cells. We find that metabolic adaptation of melanoma cells results in loss of EZH2, restoration of MHC-I expression and antigen presentation, and an increase in T cell-mediated tumor killing.

ResultsMelanoma cell adaptation to prolonged metabolic stress induces MHC-I expression and T cell-mediated killingIn contrast to acute glucose withdrawal, which has been reported to reduce tumor MHC-I expression,18 we utilized a model of prolonged glucose withdrawal, which forces cells to adapt to the metabolic condition. Melanoma cells cultured in complete high glucose media containing 4.5 g/L glucose (GLU) were switched to glucose-free media supplemented with 4.5 g/L galactose (GAL) and adapted to these conditions over 3 weeks (Figure 1A). This substitution provides the carbon necessary for biosynthetic intermediates but is known to induce glycolytic limitations.19 The resulting metabolic phenotype is adaptive and reversible, as indicated by the metabolic reversion when the melanoma cells were once again cultured in glucose media (GALGLU). Under GAL conditions, cells adapt by regulating mitochondrial respiration to meet energy demands,20 as observed through the oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR). Metabolically adapted cells exhibited reliance on mitochondrial respiration over glycolysis, and this dependence could be reversed upon the reintroduction of glucose (GALGLU) (Figure 1B). Corresponding to the increased mitochondrial respiration, these metabolically adapted cells showed potent increases in tetramethylrhodamine methyl ester staining (Figure S1A). In contrast to other models of nutrient/glycolytic stress, including 2-deoxy-d-glucose and metformin treatment, GAL conditioning significantly increases MHC-I expression at baseline and in response to interferon (IFN)-γ stimulation, as indicated by representative histograms of flow cytometry analysis for MHC-I (Figure 1C) and by MHC-I mean fluorescent intensity relative to the GLU condition (Figures 1D and S1A). Prolonged in vitro metabolic scarcity continually promotes stress, indicated by GAL-mediated elevation of key stress response and autophagy proteins (Figure S1B). Prolonged metabolic stress also significantly blunts PDL1 expression, notably shifting the immunogenic ratio of MHC-I/PDL1, in murine (B16F10) and human (A375) melanoma cell lines (Figures S1C–S1G). Transcript signatures of MHC-Db and MHC-Kb demonstrate the consistency of the phenotype in both haplotypes of murine MHC-I (Figure 1E). To determine the functionality of this GAL-mediated phenotype, GLU- or GAL-conditioned B16.ova melanoma cells were cultured independently with activated OT-1 CD8+ T cells for 24 h. As suggested by their heightened MHC-I expression, GAL melanoma cells were significantly more susceptible to T cell-mediated killing, and they maintained sensitivity to IFN-γ (Figures 1F and 1G). This phenotype was recapitulated in two human melanoma cell lines, A375 and A101D, when cultured under GAL conditions (Figure 1H).Figure 1Remodeling energy metabolism restores MHC-I expression and IFN-γ response(A) Schema of inducing metabolic conditioning in vitro.(B) Seahorse Bioanalyzer OCR/ECAR profiles for murine B16F10 cell lines.(C) Histograms (mean fluorescent intensity) of unstained B16F10, basal MHC-I, and IFN-induced MHC-I expression under various metabolic stressors.(D) Relative mean fluorescent intensity of MHC-I under GLU, GAL, and GALGLU conditions.(E–G) Transcript analysis via qPCR for murine MHC-I molecules, H2-Db and H2-Kb, under various metabolic conditions. Activated lymphocytes cultured with B16 cells for 24 h under GLU and GAL conditions (F) without and (G) with IFN-γ. Viability determined by Annexin-V and DAPI staining.(H) Histograms (mean fluorescent intensity) of MHC-I expression for human melanoma cell lines A101D and A375 under GLU and GAL conditions.∗p < 0.05 by two-way ANOVA and Sidak correction. Data represented as mean ± SEM where n = 3 biological replicates.Melanoma cell adaptation to prolonged metabolic stress induces MHC-I expression independent of JAK/STAT and IFN signalingWith cellular sensitivity to IFN-γ unaffected under GAL conditions, we next wanted to examine the metabolic impact of GAL adaption. Though this metabolic adaptation enhanced MHC-I expression independent of IFN-γ stimulation, we sought to further characterize the involvement of the IFN signaling cascade. GLU and GAL-conditioned melanoma cell lines were cultured for 48 h with or without ruxolitinib, an inhibitor of the Janus kinase (JAK) 1/2 kinase critical to IFN signaling.21 JAK inhibition caused no appreciable difference in MHC-I expression between the GLU and GAL conditions of untreated cells, and in each case, the GAL cells had significantly more MHC-I expression than their GLU counterparts (Figure 2A). Expanded investigation of IFN signaling in B16F10 melanoma was assessed by two knockout (KO) cell lines. B16F10 cell lines that lack functional IFN alpha and beta receptor subunit 1 (IFNAR1) and JAK1, respectively, were cultured under GLU and GAL conditions. The IFNAR1 receptor is utilized by type I IFNs (IFN-α and IFN-β).22 GAL adaptation significantly increased MHC-I in IFNAR1 KO cells with a nearly identical response to IFNAR1 KO cells with IFN-β stimulation (Figure 2B). JAK1 is a critical component of type I IFN and type II IFN (IFN-γ) signaling. As before, GAL adaptation significantly increased MHC-I expression in JAK1 KO cells, independent of IFN-γ or IFN-β stimulation (Figure 2C). Together, these results indicate that while the metabolic effects of GAL adaptation are potent, the dysregulation of MHC-I presentation is independent of JAK/STAT and IFN signaling.Figure 2Melanoma cell adaptation to prolonged metabolic stress induces MHC-I expression independent of JAK/STAT and IFN signaling(A) Mean fluorescent intensity of MHC-I expression in GLU- and GAL-conditioned A101D cells, with and without 48 h treatment with 10 mM ruxolitinib. Mean fluorescent intensity of MHC-I +/− IFN stimulation in (B) B16F10 IFNAR KO and (C) B16F10 JAK1 KO. Flow cytometry analyses ∗p < 0.05 by one-way ANOVA and Dunnett analysis. Data represented as mean ± SEM where n = 3 biological replicates.Proteomic analysis reveals that EZH2 dictates antigen presentation during prolonged metabolic stressTo further investigate the mechanisms by which metabolic adaptation alters MHC-I expression and sensitivity to T cell killing, mouse (B16F10) and human (A375) melanoma cell lines were analyzed via mass spectrometry-based proteomics. The distinct and reversible nature of the GAL-adapted phenotype is illustrated by principal component analysis plots for each respective cell line (Figures 3A and 3B). In agreement with flow cytometry data shown in Figure 1, proteomic analysis indicated significant elevations in proteins of antigen presentation in GAL-adapted melanoma. There was also a marked shift in genes of metabolism, indicating an increase in glucose-independent metabolic pathways (tricarboxylic acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation), as well as the Leloir pathway, which converts GAL to glucose for cellular utilization (Figures 3C and 3D). This phenotype of cellular respiration and bolstered antigen presentation was similarly observed in A101D melanoma cells (Figures S2A and S2B). Further, comparative pathway analysis of GAL-mediated cells reflects the changes in published responder datasets, with specific dysregulation of antigen presentation, immune interactions, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, and IFN signaling (Figure S2C). To gain a deeper understanding of the specific metabolic changes within the proteomic data, we employed gene set enrichment analysis, which further indicated an increase in oxidative phosphorylation from the GAL datasets of both murine and human melanoma cell lines (Figures 3E and 3F).Figure 3Proteomic analysis reveals that EZH2 dictates antigen presentation during prolonged metabolic stressPrincipal component analysis obtained from total proteomic data comparing GLU, GAL, and GALGLU conditioning of (A) murine B16F10 cells and (B) human A375 cells. Heatmaps (Z scores) of differentially expressed proteins between metabolic conditions, highlighting antigen presentation and metabolic adaptation of (C) B16F10 cells and (D) A375 cells. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) performed on total proteomic data highlighting the enrichment of differentially expressed genes in pathways of oxidative phosphorylation in GAL-conditioned (E) murine B16F10 and (F) A375 cells.To continue investigating the adaptive, IFN-independent mechanism of MHC-I dysregulation, we next specifically examined histone modifiers, as they can modulate gene expression and other critical tumor processes. EZH2 emerged as the most dysregulated histone-modifying enzyme across all three examined cell lines: B16F10, A375, and A101D (Figure 4A). EZH2 catalyzes the repressive histone mark H3K27me3 and is known to negatively regulate genes of antigen presentation.8,9,23 Immunoblots reveal a potent reduction of EZH2 abundance in both human and mouse cell lines with prolonged GAL conditioning (Figure 4B). Examining the transcriptional changes between B16 GLU and GAL cells revealed a reduction of EZH2 and corresponding increases in various genes of antigen presentation, including NLRC5, a key transactivator of MHC-I and other antigen presentation genes24 (Figure 4C). For rigor, we examined other known regulators of MHC-I alongside EZH2 (Figure S3A). In addition to the role of EZH2 as chief regulator of antigen presentation and its potential influence over the other regulatory elements,25,26 the fold change of EZH2 (log2) is nearly twice as large as that of the second-highest regulator, emphasizing a significant difference in magnitude (Figure S3B). To further inspect the regulation of EZH2, we utilized a time course of cycloheximide, an inhibitor of translation, to visualize EZH2 turnover in GLU- and GAL-conditioned melanoma cells. These immunoblots illustrate that EZH2 is degraded more rapidly under GLU conditions and suggest that, under GAL conditions, the low-abundant EZH2 is turned over more slowly (Figures 4D–4G, S3C, and S3D).Figure 4Prolonged metabolic stress transcriptionally regulates EZH2 abundance in melanoma(A) Heatmap (logFC) of histone-modifying proteins dysregulated in GAL conditioning in B16F10, A375, and A101D cell lines.(B) Immunoblot illustrating loss of EZH2 under GAL conditioning in a variety of murine and human cell lines.(C–G) mRNA signatures via qPCR of EZH2 and various other genes of MHC-I antigen presentation. Immunoblot of (D) B16 cells and (E) A101D cells, revealing EZH2 loss with cyclohexamide (CHX) treatment under GLU and GAL conditions, revealing increased half-life and potential stabilization of the EZH2 protein for (F) B16 murine melanoma and (G) A101D human melanoma.(H) Heatmap of gene expression from melanoma samples via The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Pan-Cancer study comparing EZH2 and APM expression across various EZH2 mutation types.∗p < 0.05 by two-way ANOVA and Sidak correction. Data represented as mean ± SEM where n = 3 biological replicates.In an attempt to examine EZH2 status and dysregulation in patient samples, we next turned to The Cancer Genome Atlas PanCancer study and filtered samples by EZH2 mutational status. When combined with expression data of MHC-I genes known to be under EZH2 control, this revealed mutations in the 3′ untranslated region (UTR) of EZH2, which markedly blunted the expression of antigen processing machinery (APM) genes including HLA-A, HLA-B, B2M, TAP1, TAP2, and TAPBP (Figure 4H). This supports the previously reported findings of EZH2 regulation by miRNAs,27,28,29 and while we identified differential expression of mi26a and mi101 under GAL conditions (Figure S3E), this mechanism needs to be explored further. Nevertheless, these data do demonstrate that prolonged metabolic stress is transcriptionally regulating EZH2 and the landscape of antigen presentation in melanoma cells.ChIP sequencing reveals H3K27me3 reduction at MHC-I genes during prolonged metabolic stressWe next sought to confirm the involvement of EZH2 and examine the specific EZH2 activity under conditions of prolonged metabolic stress. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) sequencing revealed global loss of H3K27me3 density 5 kb from transcription start sites in GAL-conditioned cells (Figure 5A). This indicates a robust reduction of EZH2 activity, which was further supported by immunoblots, illustrating EZH2 loss in GAL samples and further indicating a metabolism-mediated reduction of EZH2 abundance and activity (Figure 5B). Specific visualization of H3K27me3 density near genes of antigen presentation reveals the loss of EZH2 near H2K1, Tap1, and NLRC5, all potent regulators of antigen presentation and immune recognition (Figures 5C–5E). ChIP-PCR results confirmed the epigenetically permissive landscape, with GAL-mediated EZH2 activity at genes of antigen presentation demonstrating similar losses to pharmacologic EZH2 inhibition (EZH2i) via tazemetostat (Figure 5F). EZH2-mediated loss of H3K27me3 is also present at various other MHC-I antigen presentation and peptide-processing genes, including TAP2, PSMB8, and PSMB9 (Figures S4A–S4C). Annotated peaks identified during H3K7me3 enrichment of GLU- and GAL-conditioned B16F10 tumor cells can be found in Table S1.Figure 5ChIP sequencing reveals H3K27me3 reduction at MHC-I genes during prolonged metabolic stress(A) Differential H3K27me3 enrichment via chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing at loci adjacent to transcription start sites in B16F10 GLU- and GAL-conditioned cells.(B–E) (B) Immunoblot validating loss of EZH2 in total protein lysates on cells for ChIP sequencing. Integrated genome viewer (IGV) images and bar graphs representing ChIP-seq average peaks for (C) H2-K1, (D) TAP1, and (E) NLRC5 comparing H3K27me3 occupancy between GLU and GAL conditions.(F) H3K27me3-enriched ChIP-PCR for promoter regions of antigen-presentation genes validates ChIP-seq results.Data represented as mean ± SEM. Error bars denote n = 3 biological replicates, ∗p < 0.05 by one-way ANOVA with Sidak multiple comparisons.Prolonged metabolic stress mimics EZH2i in promoting T cell-mediated killingGiven the similarity in H3K27me3 reduction between GAL adaptation and EZH2i, and because of the well-established impact of EZH2i on MHC-I and related genes,8,9,23 we next sought to compare the efficacy of prolonged metabolic stress and EZH2i as mediators of in vitro T cell killing. B16.SIINFEKL30 melanoma cells were transduced with Incucyte Nuclight Red. The resulting B16.SIINFEKLred cells are compatible with a co-culture killing assay with activated CD8+ OT1 T lymphocytes, which recognize the SIINFEKL peptide,30 in a model of MHC-I-restricted killing. Under these conditions, EZH2i promoted a significant increase in tumor cell sensitivity to CD8+ T cells (Figures 6A and 6B). This discrepancy in killing can be attributed to changes in EZH2-mediated MHC-I expression, as revealed by the reduction in surface MHC-I expression following EZH2i (Figure 6C). We additionally validated the efficacy of EZH2i on the H3K27me3 histone mark, showing functional loss of EZH2 activity (Figures S4D and S4E). T cell activation and viability were largely unaffected by short-term reductions in glucose concentration (Figures S4F–S4G), further emphasizing the impact of prolonged metabolic stress. B16.SIINFEKLred cells cultured in GAL conditions demonstrated a similar sensitivity to in vitro T cell killing (Figure 6D and 6E), leading us to examine the impact of EZH2i on GLU- and GAL-conditioned tumor cells. This revealed a metabolism-dependent mechanism of tumor sensitivity, where EZH2i fails to improve the immunogenicity of GAL-adapted tumor cells (Figures 6F and 6G).Figure 6Prolonged metabolic stress mimics EZH2 inhibition in promoting T cell-mediated killing(A and B) CD8+ T cells isolated from mouse spleens were activated (αCD3/CD28) for 72 h. Plates are automatically imaged every 2 h, and at each time point, the total numbers of RFP+ (target) cells was quantified. Cell count values are normalized to target cell counts at t = 0. Error bars = SD of nine unique sites. All graphs represent the effector:target ratio of 4:1. Bar graphs represent the difference in percent change (relative tumor cell density) at t = 72 h. Activated wild-type (WT) CD8+ T cells were co-cultured with (A) B16.SIINFEKLred GLU cells +/− EZH2i (EPZ), revealing (B) a significant increase in T cell sensitivity with EPZ treatment. Asterisks denote p < 0.01 as determined by Student’s t test.(C–E) (C) Flow cytometry confirmed an increase in surface MHC-I levels in GLU cells treated with EPZ, performed in triplicate. Data represented as mean ± SEM. Co-culture assays were repeated with (D) B16.SIINFEKLred GLU and GAL cells, with (E) bar graph representing the discrepancy in killing at 72 h. Asterisks denote p < 0.01 as determined by Student’s t test.(F and G) B16.SIINFEKLred cells were cultured under GLU and GAL conditions, with and without EZH2i, with the presence of activated OT1 CD8+ T cells. ∗p < 0.05 as determined by one-way ANOVA with Sidak multiple comparisons. Data represented as mean ± SEM where n = 3 biological replicates.

Melanoma cell adaptation to prolonged metabolic stress induces MHC-I expression and T cell-mediated killingIn contrast to acute glucose withdrawal, which has been reported to reduce tumor MHC-I expression,18 we utilized a model of prolonged glucose withdrawal, which forces cells to adapt to the metabolic condition. Melanoma cells cultured in complete high glucose media containing 4.5 g/L glucose (GLU) were switched to glucose-free media supplemented with 4.5 g/L galactose (GAL) and adapted to these conditions over 3 weeks (Figure 1A). This substitution provides the carbon necessary for biosynthetic intermediates but is known to induce glycolytic limitations.19 The resulting metabolic phenotype is adaptive and reversible, as indicated by the metabolic reversion when the melanoma cells were once again cultured in glucose media (GALGLU). Under GAL conditions, cells adapt by regulating mitochondrial respiration to meet energy demands,20 as observed through the oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR). Metabolically adapted cells exhibited reliance on mitochondrial respiration over glycolysis, and this dependence could be reversed upon the reintroduction of glucose (GALGLU) (Figure 1B). Corresponding to the increased mitochondrial respiration, these metabolically adapted cells showed potent increases in tetramethylrhodamine methyl ester staining (Figure S1A). In contrast to other models of nutrient/glycolytic stress, including 2-deoxy-d-glucose and metformin treatment, GAL conditioning significantly increases MHC-I expression at baseline and in response to interferon (IFN)-γ stimulation, as indicated by representative histograms of flow cytometry analysis for MHC-I (Figure 1C) and by MHC-I mean fluorescent intensity relative to the GLU condition (Figures 1D and S1A). Prolonged in vitro metabolic scarcity continually promotes stress, indicated by GAL-mediated elevation of key stress response and autophagy proteins (Figure S1B). Prolonged metabolic stress also significantly blunts PDL1 expression, notably shifting the immunogenic ratio of MHC-I/PDL1, in murine (B16F10) and human (A375) melanoma cell lines (Figures S1C–S1G). Transcript signatures of MHC-Db and MHC-Kb demonstrate the consistency of the phenotype in both haplotypes of murine MHC-I (Figure 1E). To determine the functionality of this GAL-mediated phenotype, GLU- or GAL-conditioned B16.ova melanoma cells were cultured independently with activated OT-1 CD8+ T cells for 24 h. As suggested by their heightened MHC-I expression, GAL melanoma cells were significantly more susceptible to T cell-mediated killing, and they maintained sensitivity to IFN-γ (Figures 1F and 1G). This phenotype was recapitulated in two human melanoma cell lines, A375 and A101D, when cultured under GAL conditions (Figure 1H).Figure 1Remodeling energy metabolism restores MHC-I expression and IFN-γ response(A) Schema of inducing metabolic conditioning in vitro.(B) Seahorse Bioanalyzer OCR/ECAR profiles for murine B16F10 cell lines.(C) Histograms (mean fluorescent intensity) of unstained B16F10, basal MHC-I, and IFN-induced MHC-I expression under various metabolic stressors.(D) Relative mean fluorescent intensity of MHC-I under GLU, GAL, and GALGLU conditions.(E–G) Transcript analysis via qPCR for murine MHC-I molecules, H2-Db and H2-Kb, under various metabolic conditions. Activated lymphocytes cultured with B16 cells for 24 h under GLU and GAL conditions (F) without and (G) with IFN-γ. Viability determined by Annexin-V and DAPI staining.(H) Histograms (mean fluorescent intensity) of MHC-I expression for human melanoma cell lines A101D and A375 under GLU and GAL conditions.∗p < 0.05 by two-way ANOVA and Sidak correction. Data represented as mean ± SEM where n = 3 biological replicates.

Melanoma cell adaptation to prolonged metabolic stress induces MHC-I expression and T cell-mediated killing

In contrast to acute glucose withdrawal, which has been reported to reduce tumor MHC-I expression,18 we utilized a model of prolonged glucose withdrawal, which forces cells to adapt to the metabolic condition. Melanoma cells cultured in complete high glucose media containing 4.5 g/L glucose (GLU) were switched to glucose-free media supplemented with 4.5 g/L galactose (GAL) and adapted to these conditions over 3 weeks (Figure 1A). This substitution provides the carbon necessary for biosynthetic intermediates but is known to induce glycolytic limitations.19 The resulting metabolic phenotype is adaptive and reversible, as indicated by the metabolic reversion when the melanoma cells were once again cultured in glucose media (GALGLU). Under GAL conditions, cells adapt by regulating mitochondrial respiration to meet energy demands,20 as observed through the oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR). Metabolically adapted cells exhibited reliance on mitochondrial respiration over glycolysis, and this dependence could be reversed upon the reintroduction of glucose (GALGLU) (Figure 1B). Corresponding to the increased mitochondrial respiration, these metabolically adapted cells showed potent increases in tetramethylrhodamine methyl ester staining (Figure S1A). In contrast to other models of nutrient/glycolytic stress, including 2-deoxy-d-glucose and metformin treatment, GAL conditioning significantly increases MHC-I expression at baseline and in response to interferon (IFN)-γ stimulation, as indicated by representative histograms of flow cytometry analysis for MHC-I (Figure 1C) and by MHC-I mean fluorescent intensity relative to the GLU condition (Figures 1D and S1A). Prolonged in vitro metabolic scarcity continually promotes stress, indicated by GAL-mediated elevation of key stress response and autophagy proteins (Figure S1B). Prolonged metabolic stress also significantly blunts PDL1 expression, notably shifting the immunogenic ratio of MHC-I/PDL1, in murine (B16F10) and human (A375) melanoma cell lines (Figures S1C–S1G). Transcript signatures of MHC-Db and MHC-Kb demonstrate the consistency of the phenotype in both haplotypes of murine MHC-I (Figure 1E). To determine the functionality of this GAL-mediated phenotype, GLU- or GAL-conditioned B16.ova melanoma cells were cultured independently with activated OT-1 CD8+ T cells for 24 h. As suggested by their heightened MHC-I expression, GAL melanoma cells were significantly more susceptible to T cell-mediated killing, and they maintained sensitivity to IFN-γ (Figures 1F and 1G). This phenotype was recapitulated in two human melanoma cell lines, A375 and A101D, when cultured under GAL conditions (Figure 1H).Figure 1Remodeling energy metabolism restores MHC-I expression and IFN-γ response(A) Schema of inducing metabolic conditioning in vitro.(B) Seahorse Bioanalyzer OCR/ECAR profiles for murine B16F10 cell lines.(C) Histograms (mean fluorescent intensity) of unstained B16F10, basal MHC-I, and IFN-induced MHC-I expression under various metabolic stressors.(D) Relative mean fluorescent intensity of MHC-I under GLU, GAL, and GALGLU conditions.(E–G) Transcript analysis via qPCR for murine MHC-I molecules, H2-Db and H2-Kb, under various metabolic conditions. Activated lymphocytes cultured with B16 cells for 24 h under GLU and GAL conditions (F) without and (G) with IFN-γ. Viability determined by Annexin-V and DAPI staining.(H) Histograms (mean fluorescent intensity) of MHC-I expression for human melanoma cell lines A101D and A375 under GLU and GAL conditions.∗p < 0.05 by two-way ANOVA and Sidak correction. Data represented as mean ± SEM where n = 3 biological replicates.

Remodeling energy metabolism restores MHC-I expression and IFN-γ response

(A) Schema of inducing metabolic conditioning in vitro.

(B) Seahorse Bioanalyzer OCR/ECAR profiles for murine B16F10 cell lines.

(C) Histograms (mean fluorescent intensity) of unstained B16F10, basal MHC-I, and IFN-induced MHC-I expression under various metabolic stressors.

(D) Relative mean fluorescent intensity of MHC-I under GLU, GAL, and GALGLU conditions.

(E–G) Transcript analysis via qPCR for murine MHC-I molecules, H2-Db and H2-Kb, under various metabolic conditions. Activated lymphocytes cultured with B16 cells for 24 h under GLU and GAL conditions (F) without and (G) with IFN-γ. Viability determined by Annexin-V and DAPI staining.

(H) Histograms (mean fluorescent intensity) of MHC-I expression for human melanoma cell lines A101D and A375 under GLU and GAL conditions.

∗p < 0.05 by two-way ANOVA and Sidak correction. Data represented as mean ± SEM where n = 3 biological replicates.

Melanoma cell adaptation to prolonged metabolic stress induces MHC-I expression independent of JAK/STAT and IFN signalingWith cellular sensitivity to IFN-γ unaffected under GAL conditions, we next wanted to examine the metabolic impact of GAL adaption. Though this metabolic adaptation enhanced MHC-I expression independent of IFN-γ stimulation, we sought to further characterize the involvement of the IFN signaling cascade. GLU and GAL-conditioned melanoma cell lines were cultured for 48 h with or without ruxolitinib, an inhibitor of the Janus kinase (JAK) 1/2 kinase critical to IFN signaling.21 JAK inhibition caused no appreciable difference in MHC-I expression between the GLU and GAL conditions of untreated cells, and in each case, the GAL cells had significantly more MHC-I expression than their GLU counterparts (Figure 2A). Expanded investigation of IFN signaling in B16F10 melanoma was assessed by two knockout (KO) cell lines. B16F10 cell lines that lack functional IFN alpha and beta receptor subunit 1 (IFNAR1) and JAK1, respectively, were cultured under GLU and GAL conditions. The IFNAR1 receptor is utilized by type I IFNs (IFN-α and IFN-β).22 GAL adaptation significantly increased MHC-I in IFNAR1 KO cells with a nearly identical response to IFNAR1 KO cells with IFN-β stimulation (Figure 2B). JAK1 is a critical component of type I IFN and type II IFN (IFN-γ) signaling. As before, GAL adaptation significantly increased MHC-I expression in JAK1 KO cells, independent of IFN-γ or IFN-β stimulation (Figure 2C). Together, these results indicate that while the metabolic effects of GAL adaptation are potent, the dysregulation of MHC-I presentation is independent of JAK/STAT and IFN signaling.Figure 2Melanoma cell adaptation to prolonged metabolic stress induces MHC-I expression independent of JAK/STAT and IFN signaling(A) Mean fluorescent intensity of MHC-I expression in GLU- and GAL-conditioned A101D cells, with and without 48 h treatment with 10 mM ruxolitinib. Mean fluorescent intensity of MHC-I +/− IFN stimulation in (B) B16F10 IFNAR KO and (C) B16F10 JAK1 KO. Flow cytometry analyses ∗p < 0.05 by one-way ANOVA and Dunnett analysis. Data represented as mean ± SEM where n = 3 biological replicates.

Melanoma cell adaptation to prolonged metabolic stress induces MHC-I expression independent of JAK/STAT and IFN signaling

With cellular sensitivity to IFN-γ unaffected under GAL conditions, we next wanted to examine the metabolic impact of GAL adaption. Though this metabolic adaptation enhanced MHC-I expression independent of IFN-γ stimulation, we sought to further characterize the involvement of the IFN signaling cascade. GLU and GAL-conditioned melanoma cell lines were cultured for 48 h with or without ruxolitinib, an inhibitor of the Janus kinase (JAK) 1/2 kinase critical to IFN signaling.21 JAK inhibition caused no appreciable difference in MHC-I expression between the GLU and GAL conditions of untreated cells, and in each case, the GAL cells had significantly more MHC-I expression than their GLU counterparts (Figure 2A). Expanded investigation of IFN signaling in B16F10 melanoma was assessed by two knockout (KO) cell lines. B16F10 cell lines that lack functional IFN alpha and beta receptor subunit 1 (IFNAR1) and JAK1, respectively, were cultured under GLU and GAL conditions. The IFNAR1 receptor is utilized by type I IFNs (IFN-α and IFN-β).22 GAL adaptation significantly increased MHC-I in IFNAR1 KO cells with a nearly identical response to IFNAR1 KO cells with IFN-β stimulation (Figure 2B). JAK1 is a critical component of type I IFN and type II IFN (IFN-γ) signaling. As before, GAL adaptation significantly increased MHC-I expression in JAK1 KO cells, independent of IFN-γ or IFN-β stimulation (Figure 2C). Together, these results indicate that while the metabolic effects of GAL adaptation are potent, the dysregulation of MHC-I presentation is independent of JAK/STAT and IFN signaling.Figure 2Melanoma cell adaptation to prolonged metabolic stress induces MHC-I expression independent of JAK/STAT and IFN signaling(A) Mean fluorescent intensity of MHC-I expression in GLU- and GAL-conditioned A101D cells, with and without 48 h treatment with 10 mM ruxolitinib. Mean fluorescent intensity of MHC-I +/− IFN stimulation in (B) B16F10 IFNAR KO and (C) B16F10 JAK1 KO. Flow cytometry analyses ∗p < 0.05 by one-way ANOVA and Dunnett analysis. Data represented as mean ± SEM where n = 3 biological replicates.

Melanoma cell adaptation to prolonged metabolic stress induces MHC-I expression independent of JAK/STAT and IFN signaling

(A) Mean fluorescent intensity of MHC-I expression in GLU- and GAL-conditioned A101D cells, with and without 48 h treatment with 10 mM ruxolitinib. Mean fluorescent intensity of MHC-I +/− IFN stimulation in (B) B16F10 IFNAR KO and (C) B16F10 JAK1 KO. Flow cytometry analyses ∗p < 0.05 by one-way ANOVA and Dunnett analysis. Data represented as mean ± SEM where n = 3 biological replicates.

Proteomic analysis reveals that EZH2 dictates antigen presentation during prolonged metabolic stressTo further investigate the mechanisms by which metabolic adaptation alters MHC-I expression and sensitivity to T cell killing, mouse (B16F10) and human (A375) melanoma cell lines were analyzed via mass spectrometry-based proteomics. The distinct and reversible nature of the GAL-adapted phenotype is illustrated by principal component analysis plots for each respective cell line (Figures 3A and 3B). In agreement with flow cytometry data shown in Figure 1, proteomic analysis indicated significant elevations in proteins of antigen presentation in GAL-adapted melanoma. There was also a marked shift in genes of metabolism, indicating an increase in glucose-independent metabolic pathways (tricarboxylic acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation), as well as the Leloir pathway, which converts GAL to glucose for cellular utilization (Figures 3C and 3D). This phenotype of cellular respiration and bolstered antigen presentation was similarly observed in A101D melanoma cells (Figures S2A and S2B). Further, comparative pathway analysis of GAL-mediated cells reflects the changes in published responder datasets, with specific dysregulation of antigen presentation, immune interactions, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, and IFN signaling (Figure S2C). To gain a deeper understanding of the specific metabolic changes within the proteomic data, we employed gene set enrichment analysis, which further indicated an increase in oxidative phosphorylation from the GAL datasets of both murine and human melanoma cell lines (Figures 3E and 3F).Figure 3Proteomic analysis reveals that EZH2 dictates antigen presentation during prolonged metabolic stressPrincipal component analysis obtained from total proteomic data comparing GLU, GAL, and GALGLU conditioning of (A) murine B16F10 cells and (B) human A375 cells. Heatmaps (Z scores) of differentially expressed proteins between metabolic conditions, highlighting antigen presentation and metabolic adaptation of (C) B16F10 cells and (D) A375 cells. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) performed on total proteomic data highlighting the enrichment of differentially expressed genes in pathways of oxidative phosphorylation in GAL-conditioned (E) murine B16F10 and (F) A375 cells.To continue investigating the adaptive, IFN-independent mechanism of MHC-I dysregulation, we next specifically examined histone modifiers, as they can modulate gene expression and other critical tumor processes. EZH2 emerged as the most dysregulated histone-modifying enzyme across all three examined cell lines: B16F10, A375, and A101D (Figure 4A). EZH2 catalyzes the repressive histone mark H3K27me3 and is known to negatively regulate genes of antigen presentation.8,9,23 Immunoblots reveal a potent reduction of EZH2 abundance in both human and mouse cell lines with prolonged GAL conditioning (Figure 4B). Examining the transcriptional changes between B16 GLU and GAL cells revealed a reduction of EZH2 and corresponding increases in various genes of antigen presentation, including NLRC5, a key transactivator of MHC-I and other antigen presentation genes24 (Figure 4C). For rigor, we examined other known regulators of MHC-I alongside EZH2 (Figure S3A). In addition to the role of EZH2 as chief regulator of antigen presentation and its potential influence over the other regulatory elements,25,26 the fold change of EZH2 (log2) is nearly twice as large as that of the second-highest regulator, emphasizing a significant difference in magnitude (Figure S3B). To further inspect the regulation of EZH2, we utilized a time course of cycloheximide, an inhibitor of translation, to visualize EZH2 turnover in GLU- and GAL-conditioned melanoma cells. These immunoblots illustrate that EZH2 is degraded more rapidly under GLU conditions and suggest that, under GAL conditions, the low-abundant EZH2 is turned over more slowly (Figures 4D–4G, S3C, and S3D).Figure 4Prolonged metabolic stress transcriptionally regulates EZH2 abundance in melanoma(A) Heatmap (logFC) of histone-modifying proteins dysregulated in GAL conditioning in B16F10, A375, and A101D cell lines.(B) Immunoblot illustrating loss of EZH2 under GAL conditioning in a variety of murine and human cell lines.(C–G) mRNA signatures via qPCR of EZH2 and various other genes of MHC-I antigen presentation. Immunoblot of (D) B16 cells and (E) A101D cells, revealing EZH2 loss with cyclohexamide (CHX) treatment under GLU and GAL conditions, revealing increased half-life and potential stabilization of the EZH2 protein for (F) B16 murine melanoma and (G) A101D human melanoma.(H) Heatmap of gene expression from melanoma samples via The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Pan-Cancer study comparing EZH2 and APM expression across various EZH2 mutation types.∗p < 0.05 by two-way ANOVA and Sidak correction. Data represented as mean ± SEM where n = 3 biological replicates.In an attempt to examine EZH2 status and dysregulation in patient samples, we next turned to The Cancer Genome Atlas PanCancer study and filtered samples by EZH2 mutational status. When combined with expression data of MHC-I genes known to be under EZH2 control, this revealed mutations in the 3′ untranslated region (UTR) of EZH2, which markedly blunted the expression of antigen processing machinery (APM) genes including HLA-A, HLA-B, B2M, TAP1, TAP2, and TAPBP (Figure 4H). This supports the previously reported findings of EZH2 regulation by miRNAs,27,28,29 and while we identified differential expression of mi26a and mi101 under GAL conditions (Figure S3E), this mechanism needs to be explored further. Nevertheless, these data do demonstrate that prolonged metabolic stress is transcriptionally regulating EZH2 and the landscape of antigen presentation in melanoma cells.

Proteomic analysis reveals that EZH2 dictates antigen presentation during prolonged metabolic stress

To further investigate the mechanisms by which metabolic adaptation alters MHC-I expression and sensitivity to T cell killing, mouse (B16F10) and human (A375) melanoma cell lines were analyzed via mass spectrometry-based proteomics. The distinct and reversible nature of the GAL-adapted phenotype is illustrated by principal component analysis plots for each respective cell line (Figures 3A and 3B). In agreement with flow cytometry data shown in Figure 1, proteomic analysis indicated significant elevations in proteins of antigen presentation in GAL-adapted melanoma. There was also a marked shift in genes of metabolism, indicating an increase in glucose-independent metabolic pathways (tricarboxylic acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation), as well as the Leloir pathway, which converts GAL to glucose for cellular utilization (Figures 3C and 3D). This phenotype of cellular respiration and bolstered antigen presentation was similarly observed in A101D melanoma cells (Figures S2A and S2B). Further, comparative pathway analysis of GAL-mediated cells reflects the changes in published responder datasets, with specific dysregulation of antigen presentation, immune interactions, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, and IFN signaling (Figure S2C). To gain a deeper understanding of the specific metabolic changes within the proteomic data, we employed gene set enrichment analysis, which further indicated an increase in oxidative phosphorylation from the GAL datasets of both murine and human melanoma cell lines (Figures 3E and 3F).Figure 3Proteomic analysis reveals that EZH2 dictates antigen presentation during prolonged metabolic stressPrincipal component analysis obtained from total proteomic data comparing GLU, GAL, and GALGLU conditioning of (A) murine B16F10 cells and (B) human A375 cells. Heatmaps (Z scores) of differentially expressed proteins between metabolic conditions, highlighting antigen presentation and metabolic adaptation of (C) B16F10 cells and (D) A375 cells. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) performed on total proteomic data highlighting the enrichment of differentially expressed genes in pathways of oxidative phosphorylation in GAL-conditioned (E) murine B16F10 and (F) A375 cells.

Proteomic analysis reveals that EZH2 dictates antigen presentation during prolonged metabolic stress

Principal component analysis obtained from total proteomic data comparing GLU, GAL, and GALGLU conditioning of (A) murine B16F10 cells and (B) human A375 cells. Heatmaps (Z scores) of differentially expressed proteins between metabolic conditions, highlighting antigen presentation and metabolic adaptation of (C) B16F10 cells and (D) A375 cells. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) performed on total proteomic data highlighting the enrichment of differentially expressed genes in pathways of oxidative phosphorylation in GAL-conditioned (E) murine B16F10 and (F) A375 cells.

To continue investigating the adaptive, IFN-independent mechanism of MHC-I dysregulation, we next specifically examined histone modifiers, as they can modulate gene expression and other critical tumor processes. EZH2 emerged as the most dysregulated histone-modifying enzyme across all three examined cell lines: B16F10, A375, and A101D (Figure 4A). EZH2 catalyzes the repressive histone mark H3K27me3 and is known to negatively regulate genes of antigen presentation.8,9,23 Immunoblots reveal a potent reduction of EZH2 abundance in both human and mouse cell lines with prolonged GAL conditioning (Figure 4B). Examining the transcriptional changes between B16 GLU and GAL cells revealed a reduction of EZH2 and corresponding increases in various genes of antigen presentation, including NLRC5, a key transactivator of MHC-I and other antigen presentation genes24 (Figure 4C). For rigor, we examined other known regulators of MHC-I alongside EZH2 (Figure S3A). In addition to the role of EZH2 as chief regulator of antigen presentation and its potential influence over the other regulatory elements,25,26 the fold change of EZH2 (log2) is nearly twice as large as that of the second-highest regulator, emphasizing a significant difference in magnitude (Figure S3B). To further inspect the regulation of EZH2, we utilized a time course of cycloheximide, an inhibitor of translation, to visualize EZH2 turnover in GLU- and GAL-conditioned melanoma cells. These immunoblots illustrate that EZH2 is degraded more rapidly under GLU conditions and suggest that, under GAL conditions, the low-abundant EZH2 is turned over more slowly (Figures 4D–4G, S3C, and S3D).Figure 4Prolonged metabolic stress transcriptionally regulates EZH2 abundance in melanoma(A) Heatmap (logFC) of histone-modifying proteins dysregulated in GAL conditioning in B16F10, A375, and A101D cell lines.(B) Immunoblot illustrating loss of EZH2 under GAL conditioning in a variety of murine and human cell lines.(C–G) mRNA signatures via qPCR of EZH2 and various other genes of MHC-I antigen presentation. Immunoblot of (D) B16 cells and (E) A101D cells, revealing EZH2 loss with cyclohexamide (CHX) treatment under GLU and GAL conditions, revealing increased half-life and potential stabilization of the EZH2 protein for (F) B16 murine melanoma and (G) A101D human melanoma.(H) Heatmap of gene expression from melanoma samples via The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Pan-Cancer study comparing EZH2 and APM expression across various EZH2 mutation types.∗p < 0.05 by two-way ANOVA and Sidak correction. Data represented as mean ± SEM where n = 3 biological replicates.

Prolonged metabolic stress transcriptionally regulates EZH2 abundance in melanoma

(A) Heatmap (logFC) of histone-modifying proteins dysregulated in GAL conditioning in B16F10, A375, and A101D cell lines.

(B) Immunoblot illustrating loss of EZH2 under GAL conditioning in a variety of murine and human cell lines.

(C–G) mRNA signatures via qPCR of EZH2 and various other genes of MHC-I antigen presentation. Immunoblot of (D) B16 cells and (E) A101D cells, revealing EZH2 loss with cyclohexamide (CHX) treatment under GLU and GAL conditions, revealing increased half-life and potential stabilization of the EZH2 protein for (F) B16 murine melanoma and (G) A101D human melanoma.

(H) Heatmap of gene expression from melanoma samples via The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Pan-Cancer study comparing EZH2 and APM expression across various EZH2 mutation types.

∗p < 0.05 by two-way ANOVA and Sidak correction. Data represented as mean ± SEM where n = 3 biological replicates.

In an attempt to examine EZH2 status and dysregulation in patient samples, we next turned to The Cancer Genome Atlas PanCancer study and filtered samples by EZH2 mutational status. When combined with expression data of MHC-I genes known to be under EZH2 control, this revealed mutations in the 3′ untranslated region (UTR) of EZH2, which markedly blunted the expression of antigen processing machinery (APM) genes including HLA-A, HLA-B, B2M, TAP1, TAP2, and TAPBP (Figure 4H). This supports the previously reported findings of EZH2 regulation by miRNAs,27,28,29 and while we identified differential expression of mi26a and mi101 under GAL conditions (Figure S3E), this mechanism needs to be explored further. Nevertheless, these data do demonstrate that prolonged metabolic stress is transcriptionally regulating EZH2 and the landscape of antigen presentation in melanoma cells.

ChIP sequencing reveals H3K27me3 reduction at MHC-I genes during prolonged metabolic stressWe next sought to confirm the involvement of EZH2 and examine the specific EZH2 activity under conditions of prolonged metabolic stress. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) sequencing revealed global loss of H3K27me3 density 5 kb from transcription start sites in GAL-conditioned cells (Figure 5A). This indicates a robust reduction of EZH2 activity, which was further supported by immunoblots, illustrating EZH2 loss in GAL samples and further indicating a metabolism-mediated reduction of EZH2 abundance and activity (Figure 5B). Specific visualization of H3K27me3 density near genes of antigen presentation reveals the loss of EZH2 near H2K1, Tap1, and NLRC5, all potent regulators of antigen presentation and immune recognition (Figures 5C–5E). ChIP-PCR results confirmed the epigenetically permissive landscape, with GAL-mediated EZH2 activity at genes of antigen presentation demonstrating similar losses to pharmacologic EZH2 inhibition (EZH2i) via tazemetostat (Figure 5F). EZH2-mediated loss of H3K27me3 is also present at various other MHC-I antigen presentation and peptide-processing genes, including TAP2, PSMB8, and PSMB9 (Figures S4A–S4C). Annotated peaks identified during H3K7me3 enrichment of GLU- and GAL-conditioned B16F10 tumor cells can be found in Table S1.Figure 5ChIP sequencing reveals H3K27me3 reduction at MHC-I genes during prolonged metabolic stress(A) Differential H3K27me3 enrichment via chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing at loci adjacent to transcription start sites in B16F10 GLU- and GAL-conditioned cells.(B–E) (B) Immunoblot validating loss of EZH2 in total protein lysates on cells for ChIP sequencing. Integrated genome viewer (IGV) images and bar graphs representing ChIP-seq average peaks for (C) H2-K1, (D) TAP1, and (E) NLRC5 comparing H3K27me3 occupancy between GLU and GAL conditions.(F) H3K27me3-enriched ChIP-PCR for promoter regions of antigen-presentation genes validates ChIP-seq results.Data represented as mean ± SEM. Error bars denote n = 3 biological replicates, ∗p < 0.05 by one-way ANOVA with Sidak multiple comparisons.

ChIP sequencing reveals H3K27me3 reduction at MHC-I genes during prolonged metabolic stress

We next sought to confirm the involvement of EZH2 and examine the specific EZH2 activity under conditions of prolonged metabolic stress. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) sequencing revealed global loss of H3K27me3 density 5 kb from transcription start sites in GAL-conditioned cells (Figure 5A). This indicates a robust reduction of EZH2 activity, which was further supported by immunoblots, illustrating EZH2 loss in GAL samples and further indicating a metabolism-mediated reduction of EZH2 abundance and activity (Figure 5B). Specific visualization of H3K27me3 density near genes of antigen presentation reveals the loss of EZH2 near H2K1, Tap1, and NLRC5, all potent regulators of antigen presentation and immune recognition (Figures 5C–5E). ChIP-PCR results confirmed the epigenetically permissive landscape, with GAL-mediated EZH2 activity at genes of antigen presentation demonstrating similar losses to pharmacologic EZH2 inhibition (EZH2i) via tazemetostat (Figure 5F). EZH2-mediated loss of H3K27me3 is also present at various other MHC-I antigen presentation and peptide-processing genes, including TAP2, PSMB8, and PSMB9 (Figures S4A–S4C). Annotated peaks identified during H3K7me3 enrichment of GLU- and GAL-conditioned B16F10 tumor cells can be found in Table S1.Figure 5ChIP sequencing reveals H3K27me3 reduction at MHC-I genes during prolonged metabolic stress(A) Differential H3K27me3 enrichment via chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing at loci adjacent to transcription start sites in B16F10 GLU- and GAL-conditioned cells.(B–E) (B) Immunoblot validating loss of EZH2 in total protein lysates on cells for ChIP sequencing. Integrated genome viewer (IGV) images and bar graphs representing ChIP-seq average peaks for (C) H2-K1, (D) TAP1, and (E) NLRC5 comparing H3K27me3 occupancy between GLU and GAL conditions.(F) H3K27me3-enriched ChIP-PCR for promoter regions of antigen-presentation genes validates ChIP-seq results.Data represented as mean ± SEM. Error bars denote n = 3 biological replicates, ∗p < 0.05 by one-way ANOVA with Sidak multiple comparisons.

ChIP sequencing reveals H3K27me3 reduction at MHC-I genes during prolonged metabolic stress

(A) Differential H3K27me3 enrichment via chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing at loci adjacent to transcription start sites in B16F10 GLU- and GAL-conditioned cells.

(B–E) (B) Immunoblot validating loss of EZH2 in total protein lysates on cells for ChIP sequencing. Integrated genome viewer (IGV) images and bar graphs representing ChIP-seq average peaks for (C) H2-K1, (D) TAP1, and (E) NLRC5 comparing H3K27me3 occupancy between GLU and GAL conditions.

(F) H3K27me3-enriched ChIP-PCR for promoter regions of antigen-presentation genes validates ChIP-seq results.

Data represented as mean ± SEM. Error bars denote n = 3 biological replicates, ∗p < 0.05 by one-way ANOVA with Sidak multiple comparisons.

Prolonged metabolic stress mimics EZH2i in promoting T cell-mediated killingGiven the similarity in H3K27me3 reduction between GAL adaptation and EZH2i, and because of the well-established impact of EZH2i on MHC-I and related genes,8,9,23 we next sought to compare the efficacy of prolonged metabolic stress and EZH2i as mediators of in vitro T cell killing. B16.SIINFEKL30 melanoma cells were transduced with Incucyte Nuclight Red. The resulting B16.SIINFEKLred cells are compatible with a co-culture killing assay with activated CD8+ OT1 T lymphocytes, which recognize the SIINFEKL peptide,30 in a model of MHC-I-restricted killing. Under these conditions, EZH2i promoted a significant increase in tumor cell sensitivity to CD8+ T cells (Figures 6A and 6B). This discrepancy in killing can be attributed to changes in EZH2-mediated MHC-I expression, as revealed by the reduction in surface MHC-I expression following EZH2i (Figure 6C). We additionally validated the efficacy of EZH2i on the H3K27me3 histone mark, showing functional loss of EZH2 activity (Figures S4D and S4E). T cell activation and viability were largely unaffected by short-term reductions in glucose concentration (Figures S4F–S4G), further emphasizing the impact of prolonged metabolic stress. B16.SIINFEKLred cells cultured in GAL conditions demonstrated a similar sensitivity to in vitro T cell killing (Figure 6D and 6E), leading us to examine the impact of EZH2i on GLU- and GAL-conditioned tumor cells. This revealed a metabolism-dependent mechanism of tumor sensitivity, where EZH2i fails to improve the immunogenicity of GAL-adapted tumor cells (Figures 6F and 6G).Figure 6Prolonged metabolic stress mimics EZH2 inhibition in promoting T cell-mediated killing(A and B) CD8+ T cells isolated from mouse spleens were activated (αCD3/CD28) for 72 h. Plates are automatically imaged every 2 h, and at each time point, the total numbers of RFP+ (target) cells was quantified. Cell count values are normalized to target cell counts at t = 0. Error bars = SD of nine unique sites. All graphs represent the effector:target ratio of 4:1. Bar graphs represent the difference in percent change (relative tumor cell density) at t = 72 h. Activated wild-type (WT) CD8+ T cells were co-cultured with (A) B16.SIINFEKLred GLU cells +/− EZH2i (EPZ), revealing (B) a significant increase in T cell sensitivity with EPZ treatment. Asterisks denote p < 0.01 as determined by Student’s t test.(C–E) (C) Flow cytometry confirmed an increase in surface MHC-I levels in GLU cells treated with EPZ, performed in triplicate. Data represented as mean ± SEM. Co-culture assays were repeated with (D) B16.SIINFEKLred GLU and GAL cells, with (E) bar graph representing the discrepancy in killing at 72 h. Asterisks denote p < 0.01 as determined by Student’s t test.(F and G) B16.SIINFEKLred cells were cultured under GLU and GAL conditions, with and without EZH2i, with the presence of activated OT1 CD8+ T cells. ∗p < 0.05 as determined by one-way ANOVA with Sidak multiple comparisons. Data represented as mean ± SEM where n = 3 biological replicates.

Prolonged metabolic stress mimics EZH2i in promoting T cell-mediated killing

Given the similarity in H3K27me3 reduction between GAL adaptation and EZH2i, and because of the well-established impact of EZH2i on MHC-I and related genes,8,9,23 we next sought to compare the efficacy of prolonged metabolic stress and EZH2i as mediators of in vitro T cell killing. B16.SIINFEKL30 melanoma cells were transduced with Incucyte Nuclight Red. The resulting B16.SIINFEKLred cells are compatible with a co-culture killing assay with activated CD8+ OT1 T lymphocytes, which recognize the SIINFEKL peptide,30 in a model of MHC-I-restricted killing. Under these conditions, EZH2i promoted a significant increase in tumor cell sensitivity to CD8+ T cells (Figures 6A and 6B). This discrepancy in killing can be attributed to changes in EZH2-mediated MHC-I expression, as revealed by the reduction in surface MHC-I expression following EZH2i (Figure 6C). We additionally validated the efficacy of EZH2i on the H3K27me3 histone mark, showing functional loss of EZH2 activity (Figures S4D and S4E). T cell activation and viability were largely unaffected by short-term reductions in glucose concentration (Figures S4F–S4G), further emphasizing the impact of prolonged metabolic stress. B16.SIINFEKLred cells cultured in GAL conditions demonstrated a similar sensitivity to in vitro T cell killing (Figure 6D and 6E), leading us to examine the impact of EZH2i on GLU- and GAL-conditioned tumor cells. This revealed a metabolism-dependent mechanism of tumor sensitivity, where EZH2i fails to improve the immunogenicity of GAL-adapted tumor cells (Figures 6F and 6G).Figure 6Prolonged metabolic stress mimics EZH2 inhibition in promoting T cell-mediated killing(A and B) CD8+ T cells isolated from mouse spleens were activated (αCD3/CD28) for 72 h. Plates are automatically imaged every 2 h, and at each time point, the total numbers of RFP+ (target) cells was quantified. Cell count values are normalized to target cell counts at t = 0. Error bars = SD of nine unique sites. All graphs represent the effector:target ratio of 4:1. Bar graphs represent the difference in percent change (relative tumor cell density) at t = 72 h. Activated wild-type (WT) CD8+ T cells were co-cultured with (A) B16.SIINFEKLred GLU cells +/− EZH2i (EPZ), revealing (B) a significant increase in T cell sensitivity with EPZ treatment. Asterisks denote p < 0.01 as determined by Student’s t test.(C–E) (C) Flow cytometry confirmed an increase in surface MHC-I levels in GLU cells treated with EPZ, performed in triplicate. Data represented as mean ± SEM. Co-culture assays were repeated with (D) B16.SIINFEKLred GLU and GAL cells, with (E) bar graph representing the discrepancy in killing at 72 h. Asterisks denote p < 0.01 as determined by Student’s t test.(F and G) B16.SIINFEKLred cells were cultured under GLU and GAL conditions, with and without EZH2i, with the presence of activated OT1 CD8+ T cells. ∗p < 0.05 as determined by one-way ANOVA with Sidak multiple comparisons. Data represented as mean ± SEM where n = 3 biological replicates.

Prolonged metabolic stress mimics EZH2 inhibition in promoting T cell-mediated killing

(A and B) CD8+ T cells isolated from mouse spleens were activated (αCD3/CD28) for 72 h. Plates are automatically imaged every 2 h, and at each time point, the total numbers of RFP+ (target) cells was quantified. Cell count values are normalized to target cell counts at t = 0. Error bars = SD of nine unique sites. All graphs represent the effector:target ratio of 4:1. Bar graphs represent the difference in percent change (relative tumor cell density) at t = 72 h. Activated wild-type (WT) CD8+ T cells were co-cultured with (A) B16.SIINFEKLred GLU cells +/− EZH2i (EPZ), revealing (B) a significant increase in T cell sensitivity with EPZ treatment. Asterisks denote p < 0.01 as determined by Student’s t test.

(C–E) (C) Flow cytometry confirmed an increase in surface MHC-I levels in GLU cells treated with EPZ, performed in triplicate. Data represented as mean ± SEM. Co-culture assays were repeated with (D) B16.SIINFEKLred GLU and GAL cells, with (E) bar graph representing the discrepancy in killing at 72 h. Asterisks denote p < 0.01 as determined by Student’s t test.

(F and G) B16.SIINFEKLred cells were cultured under GLU and GAL conditions, with and without EZH2i, with the presence of activated OT1 CD8+ T cells. ∗p < 0.05 as determined by one-way ANOVA with Sidak multiple comparisons. Data represented as mean ± SEM where n = 3 biological replicates.

DiscussionThrough these experiments, we have outlined a regulatory mechanism of EZH2-controlled antigen presentation, independent of IFN signaling. Through a model of adaptive metabolic remodeling, we have uncovered an epigenetic mechanism that promotes a highly immunogenic phenotype. Under conditions of prolonged glucose deprivation, the lack of glycolytic nutrients promotes cellular respiration and epigenetic remodeling. In melanoma cells, this adaptation elevates MHC-I antigen presentation and immune-mediated killing, independent of IFN signaling. Transcriptional abundance and overall activity of histone methyltransferase EZH2, a negative regulator of MHC-I antigen presentation, is greatly reduced under conditions of prolonged metabolic stress. When compared to pharmacologic inhibition of EZH2, this metabolism-mediated phenotype results in similar abrogation of EZH2 activity and sensitivity to T cell-mediated killing.The TME shapes the immune-tumor interface via nutrient availability and byproduct buildup.20 Though rapidly dividing cells utilize glucose oxidation for its energy efficiency, cancer cells classically prefer fermentation.31 This preference supports rapidly dividing tumor cells by providing energy, biosynthetic intermediates, and limiting oxidative stress. Further, tumor cells promote acidification and hypoxia in the local milieu, which can dampen the local immune response.20 The importance of metabolism has recently surfaced as a key determinant of immunotherapy responsiveness,17 with immune cell and tumor cell metabolisms playing distinct roles.32,33 Specifically, in a large proteomic analysis, Harel et al. uncovered that immunotherapy-responsive melanomas exhibit higher oxidative phosphorylation and lipid metabolism.34Though our knowledge of this relationship is growing, the connection of tumor metabolism and epigenetic control is still underexplored. Cancer cells initiate epigenetic changes to support the demands of rapid proliferation,35 but these modifications rely on various biosynthetic intermediates often depleted in the TME.35 The impact of intermediate availability and the resulting ER stress on the tumor epigenetic landscape is poorly understood.36 Common models of metabolic stress include treatment with tunicamycin, thapsigargin, and 2-deoxyglucose, which represent acute stressors of the ER. These models of acute stress decrease tumor antigenicity and can be lethal if persistent,18,37 which overlook the more long-term and adaptive changes thought to take place within the TME.In contrast to models of acute metabolic stress, which often attribute IFN signaling to changes in antigenicity,38,39 our findings suggest that prolonged, adaptive metabolic stress can promote tumor antigen presentation through epigenetic remodeling. Supplementing glucose-depleted medium with GAL imposes a significant glycolytic limitation while providing enough carbon to sustain cellular demands.19 Specifically, we identify EZH2 as the chief histone modifier responsible for inducing this highly antigenic phenotype, and we demonstrate consistently that GAL adaptation diminishes EZH2 abundance and activity, significantly increasing antigenicity and CD8+ T cell sensitivity. EZH2 is well established as a regulator of MHC-I and antigen presentation,8,9,23 and changes in EZH2 activity have been shown to alter lipid and amino acid metabolism.40As ChIP sequencing of GAL-adapted melanoma cells revealed EZH2 control of antigen presentation, we sought to assess the role of independent EZH2 loss on tumor immunogenicity and sensitivity to T cell killing. By culturing tumor cells with EZH2 inhibitor tazemetostat, we were able to observe an EZH2-centric sensitivity to T cell-mediated killing. Interestingly, the total tumor sensitivity was virtually indistinguishable from the sensitivity revealed in GAL-adapted tumor cells, further implicating EZH2 dysregulation in this mechanism of tumor killing. Though tazemetostat has been Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved for limited use, its broad application has been hindered by off-target and adverse effects.41 The significant improvements in melanoma antigen presentation and T cell killing we observed with EZH2i add enthusiasm for their continued clinical use. Specifically, we suspect that the observed changes in MHC-I gene expression, and subsequent induction of antigen presentation, have the potential to positively influence immune recognition of melanoma cells and thereby improve responsiveness to ICB.Despite our consistent demonstration that metabolic adaptation to reduced glucose disrupts EZH2 activity and significantly enhances MHC-I antigen presentation, this phenomenon is not regularly observed in patient tumors, including those solid tumors characterized by glucose deprivation. Although many factors influence tumor development and disease progression, our findings directly implicate EZH2 in the development of this immunogenic phenotype. EZH2, like many other proteins, is subject to a variety of mutations and alterations that could prevent this phenotype, including gain-of-function mutations (Y641), changes in phosphorylation and activity (T211A), and changes in protein dynamics (T350A).42,43,44,45 Further analysis of EZH2 mutations from The Cancer Genome Atlas revealed that specific mutations in the 3′ UTR correlate with robust reductions in genes of antigen presentation. The 3′ UTR is known to regulate EZH2 expression, specifically through miR-26a and miR-101 inhibition,27,28,29 which we found significantly elevated in GAL-adapted tumor cells. Although correlative, this finding does support EZH2 mutational status as a contributing factor for miRNA regulation and, therefore, the observation of the metabolism-mediated immunogenic phenotype. Additionally, we identified significant increases in ER stress proteins within our GAL-adapted model, which are associated with general decreases in antigenicity.17,18,46 It is additionally possible that the ER stress within the solid TME is greater than in vitro and is mitigating the increase in antigen presentation.As mentioned previously, EZH2i has shown therapeutic potential and was approved January 23, 2020, by the FDA for adult and pediatric patients with metastatic or locally advanced epithelioid sarcoma not eligible for complete resection.41 Though adverse effects are not uncommon,41 the direct off-target implications of EZH2i include immune cells, specifically inducing exhaustion in CD8+ T cells, as our lab and others have previously demonstrated.47,48 These adverse immune effects decrease the overall enthusiasm for utilizing tazemetostat as an adjuvant to ICB; however, the improvement in overall killing seen with tumor-specific EZH2 inhibition suggests a role for tazemetostat as a potential adoptive therapy.ConclusionsHere, we demonstrate that adaptation to prolonged metabolic stress can promote IFN-independent antigen presentation through a mechanism of epigenetic control. Adaptation to glycolytic limitation promotes transcriptional repression of EZH2 and loss of EZH2-catalyzed histone methylation (H3K27me3) at genes of antigen presentation, significantly increasing tumor cell sensitivity to CD8+ T cell killing. The IFN-independent nature of this phenomenon highlights the importance and therapeutic potential for exploiting mechanisms that control antigen presentation and immune recognition. While our findings support previously reported miRNA regulation of EZH2, the mechanism by which metabolic conditioning influences the epigenetic landscape is still unclear. Nevertheless, these studies further implicate controlling EZH2 for bolstering the melanoma ICB response and have consistently demonstrated a phenotype of metabolism-mediated phenotype of antigen presentation. Together, these data encourage studying EZH2 and its role as a key putative target for combining with ICB against solid tumors, including melanoma.Limitations of the studyThe work here outlines a connection between metabolic stress and upregulation of MHC-I antigen presentation via EZH2 dysregulation. Though we demonstrate consistent transcriptional repression of EZH2, the exact mechanism of this metabolism-mediated control is not elucidated. Additionally, the model of prolonged metabolic stress utilized here is effective in vitro; however, the supplementation of GAL combined with glucose withdrawal presents challenges that prohibit its use in vivo. This limits our ability to assess these findings in preclinical models of melanoma. Nevertheless, this work contributes to our understanding of EZH2 and antigen presentation in solid tumors and will continue to provide context as EZH2 inhibitors are further developed and prescribed in patient settings.

Through these experiments, we have outlined a regulatory mechanism of EZH2-controlled antigen presentation, independent of IFN signaling. Through a model of adaptive metabolic remodeling, we have uncovered an epigenetic mechanism that promotes a highly immunogenic phenotype. Under conditions of prolonged glucose deprivation, the lack of glycolytic nutrients promotes cellular respiration and epigenetic remodeling. In melanoma cells, this adaptation elevates MHC-I antigen presentation and immune-mediated killing, independent of IFN signaling. Transcriptional abundance and overall activity of histone methyltransferase EZH2, a negative regulator of MHC-I antigen presentation, is greatly reduced under conditions of prolonged metabolic stress. When compared to pharmacologic inhibition of EZH2, this metabolism-mediated phenotype results in similar abrogation of EZH2 activity and sensitivity to T cell-mediated killing.

The TME shapes the immune-tumor interface via nutrient availability and byproduct buildup.20 Though rapidly dividing cells utilize glucose oxidation for its energy efficiency, cancer cells classically prefer fermentation.31 This preference supports rapidly dividing tumor cells by providing energy, biosynthetic intermediates, and limiting oxidative stress. Further, tumor cells promote acidification and hypoxia in the local milieu, which can dampen the local immune response.20 The importance of metabolism has recently surfaced as a key determinant of immunotherapy responsiveness,17 with immune cell and tumor cell metabolisms playing distinct roles.32,33 Specifically, in a large proteomic analysis, Harel et al. uncovered that immunotherapy-responsive melanomas exhibit higher oxidative phosphorylation and lipid metabolism.34

Though our knowledge of this relationship is growing, the connection of tumor metabolism and epigenetic control is still underexplored. Cancer cells initiate epigenetic changes to support the demands of rapid proliferation,35 but these modifications rely on various biosynthetic intermediates often depleted in the TME.35 The impact of intermediate availability and the resulting ER stress on the tumor epigenetic landscape is poorly understood.36 Common models of metabolic stress include treatment with tunicamycin, thapsigargin, and 2-deoxyglucose, which represent acute stressors of the ER. These models of acute stress decrease tumor antigenicity and can be lethal if persistent,18,37 which overlook the more long-term and adaptive changes thought to take place within the TME.

In contrast to models of acute metabolic stress, which often attribute IFN signaling to changes in antigenicity,38,39 our findings suggest that prolonged, adaptive metabolic stress can promote tumor antigen presentation through epigenetic remodeling. Supplementing glucose-depleted medium with GAL imposes a significant glycolytic limitation while providing enough carbon to sustain cellular demands.19 Specifically, we identify EZH2 as the chief histone modifier responsible for inducing this highly antigenic phenotype, and we demonstrate consistently that GAL adaptation diminishes EZH2 abundance and activity, significantly increasing antigenicity and CD8+ T cell sensitivity. EZH2 is well established as a regulator of MHC-I and antigen presentation,8,9,23 and changes in EZH2 activity have been shown to alter lipid and amino acid metabolism.40

As ChIP sequencing of GAL-adapted melanoma cells revealed EZH2 control of antigen presentation, we sought to assess the role of independent EZH2 loss on tumor immunogenicity and sensitivity to T cell killing. By culturing tumor cells with EZH2 inhibitor tazemetostat, we were able to observe an EZH2-centric sensitivity to T cell-mediated killing. Interestingly, the total tumor sensitivity was virtually indistinguishable from the sensitivity revealed in GAL-adapted tumor cells, further implicating EZH2 dysregulation in this mechanism of tumor killing. Though tazemetostat has been Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved for limited use, its broad application has been hindered by off-target and adverse effects.41 The significant improvements in melanoma antigen presentation and T cell killing we observed with EZH2i add enthusiasm for their continued clinical use. Specifically, we suspect that the observed changes in MHC-I gene expression, and subsequent induction of antigen presentation, have the potential to positively influence immune recognition of melanoma cells and thereby improve responsiveness to ICB.

Despite our consistent demonstration that metabolic adaptation to reduced glucose disrupts EZH2 activity and significantly enhances MHC-I antigen presentation, this phenomenon is not regularly observed in patient tumors, including those solid tumors characterized by glucose deprivation. Although many factors influence tumor development and disease progression, our findings directly implicate EZH2 in the development of this immunogenic phenotype. EZH2, like many other proteins, is subject to a variety of mutations and alterations that could prevent this phenotype, including gain-of-function mutations (Y641), changes in phosphorylation and activity (T211A), and changes in protein dynamics (T350A).42,43,44,45 Further analysis of EZH2 mutations from The Cancer Genome Atlas revealed that specific mutations in the 3′ UTR correlate with robust reductions in genes of antigen presentation. The 3′ UTR is known to regulate EZH2 expression, specifically through miR-26a and miR-101 inhibition,27,28,29 which we found significantly elevated in GAL-adapted tumor cells. Although correlative, this finding does support EZH2 mutational status as a contributing factor for miRNA regulation and, therefore, the observation of the metabolism-mediated immunogenic phenotype. Additionally, we identified significant increases in ER stress proteins within our GAL-adapted model, which are associated with general decreases in antigenicity.17,18,46 It is additionally possible that the ER stress within the solid TME is greater than in vitro and is mitigating the increase in antigen presentation.

As mentioned previously, EZH2i has shown therapeutic potential and was approved January 23, 2020, by the FDA for adult and pediatric patients with metastatic or locally advanced epithelioid sarcoma not eligible for complete resection.41 Though adverse effects are not uncommon,41 the direct off-target implications of EZH2i include immune cells, specifically inducing exhaustion in CD8+ T cells, as our lab and others have previously demonstrated.47,48 These adverse immune effects decrease the overall enthusiasm for utilizing tazemetostat as an adjuvant to ICB; however, the improvement in overall killing seen with tumor-specific EZH2 inhibition suggests a role for tazemetostat as a potential adoptive therapy.

ConclusionsHere, we demonstrate that adaptation to prolonged metabolic stress can promote IFN-independent antigen presentation through a mechanism of epigenetic control. Adaptation to glycolytic limitation promotes transcriptional repression of EZH2 and loss of EZH2-catalyzed histone methylation (H3K27me3) at genes of antigen presentation, significantly increasing tumor cell sensitivity to CD8+ T cell killing. The IFN-independent nature of this phenomenon highlights the importance and therapeutic potential for exploiting mechanisms that control antigen presentation and immune recognition. While our findings support previously reported miRNA regulation of EZH2, the mechanism by which metabolic conditioning influences the epigenetic landscape is still unclear. Nevertheless, these studies further implicate controlling EZH2 for bolstering the melanoma ICB response and have consistently demonstrated a phenotype of metabolism-mediated phenotype of antigen presentation. Together, these data encourage studying EZH2 and its role as a key putative target for combining with ICB against solid tumors, including melanoma.

Conclusions

Here, we demonstrate that adaptation to prolonged metabolic stress can promote IFN-independent antigen presentation through a mechanism of epigenetic control. Adaptation to glycolytic limitation promotes transcriptional repression of EZH2 and loss of EZH2-catalyzed histone methylation (H3K27me3) at genes of antigen presentation, significantly increasing tumor cell sensitivity to CD8+ T cell killing. The IFN-independent nature of this phenomenon highlights the importance and therapeutic potential for exploiting mechanisms that control antigen presentation and immune recognition. While our findings support previously reported miRNA regulation of EZH2, the mechanism by which metabolic conditioning influences the epigenetic landscape is still unclear. Nevertheless, these studies further implicate controlling EZH2 for bolstering the melanoma ICB response and have consistently demonstrated a phenotype of metabolism-mediated phenotype of antigen presentation. Together, these data encourage studying EZH2 and its role as a key putative target for combining with ICB against solid tumors, including melanoma.

Limitations of the studyThe work here outlines a connection between metabolic stress and upregulation of MHC-I antigen presentation via EZH2 dysregulation. Though we demonstrate consistent transcriptional repression of EZH2, the exact mechanism of this metabolism-mediated control is not elucidated. Additionally, the model of prolonged metabolic stress utilized here is effective in vitro; however, the supplementation of GAL combined with glucose withdrawal presents challenges that prohibit its use in vivo. This limits our ability to assess these findings in preclinical models of melanoma. Nevertheless, this work contributes to our understanding of EZH2 and antigen presentation in solid tumors and will continue to provide context as EZH2 inhibitors are further developed and prescribed in patient settings.

Limitations of the study

The work here outlines a connection between metabolic stress and upregulation of MHC-I antigen presentation via EZH2 dysregulation. Though we demonstrate consistent transcriptional repression of EZH2, the exact mechanism of this metabolism-mediated control is not elucidated. Additionally, the model of prolonged metabolic stress utilized here is effective in vitro; however, the supplementation of GAL combined with glucose withdrawal presents challenges that prohibit its use in vivo. This limits our ability to assess these findings in preclinical models of melanoma. Nevertheless, this work contributes to our understanding of EZH2 and antigen presentation in solid tumors and will continue to provide context as EZH2 inhibitors are further developed and prescribed in patient settings.

Resource availabilityLead contactRequests for further information and resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Dr. Brian Koss (bskoss@uams.edu).Materials availabilityThis study did not generate new unique reagents.Data and code availability
•All data reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contact upon request.•This paper does not report original code.•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.•The proteomics datasets generated during this study are available with the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository. ProteomeXchange Dataset PXD054843.•The ChIP sequencing datasets generated during this study are available with the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). Accession #GSE297168.

Resource availability

Lead contactRequests for further information and resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Dr. Brian Koss (bskoss@uams.edu).

Lead contact

Requests for further information and resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Dr. Brian Koss (bskoss@uams.edu).

Materials availabilityThis study did not generate new unique reagents.

Materials availability

This study did not generate new unique reagents.

Data and code availability
•All data reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contact upon request.•This paper does not report original code.•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.•The proteomics datasets generated during this study are available with the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository. ProteomeXchange Dataset PXD054843.•The ChIP sequencing datasets generated during this study are available with the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). Accession #GSE297168.

Data and code availability

•All data reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contact upon request.•This paper does not report original code.•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.•The proteomics datasets generated during this study are available with the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository. ProteomeXchange Dataset PXD054843.•The ChIP sequencing datasets generated during this study are available with the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). Accession #GSE297168.

All data reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contact upon request.

This paper does not report original code.

Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

The proteomics datasets generated during this study are available with the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository. ProteomeXchange Dataset PXD054843.

The ChIP sequencing datasets generated during this study are available with the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). Accession #GSE297168.

The authors declare no competing interests.

STAR★MethodsKey resources table
REAGENT or RESOURCESOURCEIDENTIFIERAntibodiesMouse anti-H2Kb/H2DbBiolegendCat# 114608; RRID: AB_313598Mouse anti-H2Kb-SIINFEKLBiolegendCat# 141604; RRID:AB_10895905Mouse anti-PDL1BiolegendCat# 124312; RRID:AB_10612741Human anti-HLA/HLBBiolegendCat# 311406; RRID:AB_314875Human anti-PDL1BiolegendCat# 393610; RRID:AB_2749927Anti-EZH2Cell SignalingCat# 52468; RRID:AB_10694683Anti-GAPDHCell SignalingCat# 2118; RRID:AB_561053Human anti-AMPKCell SignalingCat# 2532; RRID:AB_330331Human anti-pAMPkCell SignalingCat# 2531; RRID:AB_330330Human anti-Beclin1Cell SignalingCat# 3738; RRID:AB_490837Human anti-ULK1Cell SignalingCat# 8054; RRID: AB_11178668Human anti-pULK1Cell SignalingCat# 6888; RRID:AB_10829226Human anti-RaptorCell SignalingCat# 2280; RRID:AB_561245Human anti-pRaptorCell SignalingCat# 2083; RRID:AB_330330Rabbit IgGMP BiomedicalsCat# 55944; RRID:AB_2334717Anti-H3K27me3AbcamCat#ab6002; RRID:AB_305237IgA DynaBeadsInvitrogenCat# 10001D; RRID:AB_2783043Bacterial and virus strainsIncucyte Nuclight Red titerSartoriusCat# 4625Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteinsPolybreneMilliporeCat# TR-1003 GRuxolitinibSelleckChemCat# S1378TazemetostatSelleckChemCat# S7128OligomycinAPExBioCat# A5588FCCPCayman ChemicalCat# 15218RotenoneAbcamCat# ab143145Antimycin AThermo FisherCat# J63522-MA2-DeoxyglucoseMilliporeCat# 154-17-6MetforminMilliporeCat# 1115-70-4Recombinant mouse IL-2PeproTechCat# 212-12Recombinant human IL-2PeproTechCat# 200-D2Mouse IFN-gBioLegendCat# 570204Human IFN-gBioLegendCat# 575304CyclohexamideMilliporeCat# C7698-1GCritical commercial assaysTaqMan miRNA RT kitApplied biosystemsCat# 4366596TaqMan miRNA AssayApplied biosystemsCat# A25576TaqMan miRNA hsa-miR-101Applied biosystemsCat# 002253TaqMan miRNA has-miR-26aApplied biosystemsCat# 000405RNEasy RNA Isolation KitQiagenCat# 74106iScript cDNA synthesis kitBioRadCat# 1708841SYBR Green Universal PCR mixBioRadCat# 1725124Deposited dataRaw and Analyzed Mass Spectrometry DataThis PaperProteomeXchange Dataset PXD054843Raw and Analyzed ChIP Sequencing DataThis PaperGSE297168Experimental models: Cell linesB16F10ATCCCat# CRL-6475MC38Sigma-AldrichCat# SCC172A375ATCCCat# CRL-1619A101DATCCCat# CRL-7898Experimental models: Organisms/strainsC57BL/6-Tg(TcraTcrb)1100Mjb/JJackson LabsCat# 003831OligonucleotidesSee Table S2 for qPCR primer listN/ASoftware and algorithmsFlowJoN/Ahttps://www.flowjo.com/Graphpad Prism 9.2N/Ahttps://www.graphpad.com/ImageJSchindelin et al.https://github.com/imagejSnapGeneN/Ahttps://www.snapgene.com/ImageLab 6.1N/A#12012931GSEA 4.3.3Subramanian et al, Mootha et al.http://www.broad.mit.edu/gsea/ReactomeMilacic et al.https://reactome.org/
Experimental model and study participant detailsCell lines and culture conditionsCell lines used in this study can be found in the key resources table. B16F10 JAK1 −/− and IFNAR1 −/− were a kind gift from the Antoni Ribas laboratory (University of California, Los Angeles). B16.SIINFEKLred cell line was created in the Tackett and Koss labs. Tumor cells were seeded and cultured under normal glucose (GLU) conditions (21% O2, 5% CO2, 4.5 g/L glucose) in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM), supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, 100 U/mL penicillin, 0.2% βME, and 2 mM L-glutamine. Tumor cells were additionally cultured in glucose-free DMEM with 10% dialyzed FBS and 4.6 g/L d-galactose (GAL) while keeping O2 and CO2 consistent. Once tumor cells in GAL conditions were able to reach confluency in a 10cm dish, the cells were considered successfully adapted.Spleens were harvested from OT-1 TCR transgenic mice and primary splenocytes were isolated. Splenocytes were separated into single-cell suspensions and isolated via a magnetic positive CD8+ selection kit (Miltenyi Biotec) before 72-h activation via αCD3/αCD28 stimulation. CD8+ T cells were cultured in RPMI (Life Technologies) with 10% FBS, 0.2% βME, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, 100 U/mL penicillin, 2 mM L-glutamine (Invitrogen), and recombinant mouse IL-2 (Novartis). Mice strains and T cell isolation kits can be found in the key resources table.All experiments were conducted under an IACUC-approved protocol for laboratory animals that conforms to the NIH guidelines. Experiments utilized both male and female mice, 6-8 weeks old, which were housed in specific pathogen-free conditions. These animals were utilized for experiments requiring murine primary cells (splenocytes, CD8+ T cells), not the live animals themselves. The protocols are approved by the UAMS Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) AUP #IPROTO202300000015, which support and include this work.Ethics and approval and consent to participateAll experiments were conducted under an IACUC-approved protocol for laboratory animals that conforms to the NIH guidelines. The protocols are approved by the UAMS Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) AUP #IPROTO202300000015, which support and include this work.Method detailsGenerating B16.SIINFEKLred cellsTo generate B16.SIINFEKLred cells, B16.SIINFEKL cells were plated at 1.25 x 104 in 96-well plate with 50μL OptimMem (Gibco). Polybrene (final concentration of 4 μg/mL) and 35μL of Incucyte ® Nuclight Red Lentivirus titer (Sartorius #4625) were added. Cells were cultured for 7 days and sorted. For JAK1/2 inhibition, 4 μM Ruxolitinib (SelleckChem #S1378) was added in vitro for 48 h 2.5μM Tazemetostat (SelleckChem #S7128) was used to inhibit EZH2 activity.Metabolic profile analysisOxygen consumption rate (OCP) and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) were quantified using the Agilent Seahorse XPe96 Analyzer. Tumor cells were plated at 4x104 per well of a Seahorse XFe96 cell culture microplates. Cells were cultured under GLU and GAL conditions with 8 replicates per condition and plated in XF media (RPMI 1640 with 10mmol/L glucose, 2mmol/L L-glutamine, and 1mmol/L sodium pyruvate). The A-C ports in the lid were filled with the following: (a) 20μL 1μM Oligomycin [APExBio, #A5588] (b) 22μL of 2μM fluoro-carbonyl cyanide phenylhydrazone (FCCP) [Cayman, #15218] (c) 25μL of 0.5μM Rotenone [abcam, #ab143145]/antimycin A.In vitro killing assayCD8+ T cell killing was quantified by percent tumor (target) cells remaining. CD8+ T cells from wild-type C57BL/6 mice (control) or from transgenic OT-1 (tumor-specific mice) were activated prior to co-culture. Target cells (B16.SIINFEKLred) were plated 6 h prior to the addition of T cells. The co-culture was plated for 72h at different target: effector (T:E) ratios, including 1:1, 2:1, 4:1, 8:1, etc. Initial T cell killing was determined via flow cytometry through Annexin V staining. Larger killing assays were quantified using the ImageXpress HT.ai confocal imaging system (Molecular Devices). Plates were automatically imaged every 2 h and at each timepoint the total numbers of RFP+ (Target) cells was quantified. Cell count values were normalized to target cell counts at t = 0, and to the growth of cells at the 0:1 T:E ratio.Flow cytometry analysisTumor cells were plated in fresh media at 0.5 x 106 cells/mL in 96-well plates. Cells were cultured under normal glucose (GLU) or glucose-deprived (GAL) conditions. Other models of cellular stress include in vitro treatment with 2-deoxy-d-glucose (2-DG) and metformin. Prior to flow cytometry analysis for MHC-I expression, tumor cells were cultured for 24 h with 10mM 2-DG (ACROS, #111980050) or 10mM metformin (MP Bio, #151691). MHC-I surface expression was determined on a LSRFortessa flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) by staining for murine pan-MHC-I (Biolegend #114608), murine PDL1 (Biolegend #124312), human MHC-I (Biolegend #311406) and human PDL1 (Biolegend #393610). Cell viability was determined by DAPI staining. Samples gated and analyzed using FlowJo software (Tree Star).Quantitative PCRFor qPCR, was performed using the CFX96TM Real Time System (Biorad) with SYBR® Green Supermix (Biorad). The cycling conditions were set at 95°C for 3 min, followed by 40 cycles of 15 s at 95°C, 30 s at 60°C and 30 s at 72°C. Measurements were performed in triplicates. Ct-values were normalized to the expression of the housekeeping gene UBC or b-actin. Micro-RNA quantification was performed following the TaqMan miRNA isolation, reverse-transcription, and detection assays, according to manufacturer’s instructions.Western BlottingCellular protein extracts were isolated by directly adding RIPA buffer (10mM Tris-Cl, 1mM EDTA, 0.5mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 40mM NaCl) directly to tumor cells for 30 min. Protein concentrations were measured using BCA (Bicinchoninic acid) protein assay (Fisher). 20μg of protein extracts were separated on precast bis-Tris NuPage 4%-12% gels (Fisher). Afterwards, protein extracts were transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane using the iBlot 3 Western Blot Transfer System (Fisher). After transfer, membranes were blocked for 30min in 5 mL 5% Milk and probed overnight with primary antibody for AMPK (Cell Signaling #2532), pAMPK (Cell Signaling #2531), Beclin1 (Cell Signaling #3738), ULK1 (Cell Signaling #8054), pULK1 (Cell Signaling #6888), Raptor (Cell Signaling #2280), pRaptor (Cell Signaling #2083) or GAPDH (Cell Signaling #2118). membranes were washed 3 times with 5 mL 0.1% Tween/TBS and incubated with anti-rabbit IgG or anti-mouse IgG with HPR-linked antibody (Cell signaling #7074, #7075) for 1 h. Membranes were developed using Western Lightning Plus ECL enhanced chemiluminescent substrate (Perkin-Elmer) and analyzed with a Chemidoc imager (BioRad). Western-blots were quantified by measuring protein band intensity using imageJ software. Samples were normalized with beta-actin or GAPDH band intensity. For protein stability immunoblot, cells were grown with cyclohexamide ( for 0, 2, 4, and 8 h prior to harvest.Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)20 million B16F10 cells growing under GLU or GAL conditions were fixed in 1.1% PFA solution for 15 min. To quench the cross-linking, a final concentration of .125 M glycine was added for 5 min before cells were harvested. The cells were washed in chilled PBS with .5% Igepal twice, before adding PBS-Igepal with 1mM PMSF. The ChIP DNA samples were then submitted to Active Motif for preparation of libraries, sequencing, and analysis.ChIP sequencing and ChIP-PCRChIP-pcr was used to validate the H3K27me3 at loci of antigen presentation in B16F10 cells. 6x106 cells were resuspended in nChIP lysis buffer (250 mM Sucrose, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM Sodium Butyrate, 0.1% Triton X-100, 5 mM MgCl2, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 5 mM KCl) and transferred to a chilled dounce homogenizer for lysis. Nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation at 1000 x g for 10 min at 4°C, and resuspended in MNase digestion buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 5 mM CaCl2) for chromatin fragmentation. Chromatin were resolubilized in ice cold 10 mM EDTA before pre-clearing chromatin lysate with IgG-bound dynabeads (Fisher #10001D). H3K27me3 immunoprecipitation followed pre-clearing with H3K27me3 (Abcam #4729) conjugated Dynabeads. Bound chromatin was eluted from beads by shaking at 65°C in Elution Buffer (1% SDS, 100 mM Sodium Bicaronate, pH 8). DNA was extracted using QIAmp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen 51304), following the manufacturer’s instructions.Quantification and statistical analysisUnless otherwise stated in the specific methology section, comparisons for two groups, and three groups were calculated via unpaired Two-Tailed student’s t-tests and One-Way ANOVA analyses followed by multiple comparison tests. When compared over time, Two-Way ANOVA analyses were used with Sidak multiple comparison analysis. Survival data, plotted as Kaplan-Meier graphs, log-rank analyses were used to determine p values. Statistical significance was determined if p < 0.05, represented in figures by ∗.Statistical tests, unless otherwise described, were performed using GraphPad Prism 9.2. Pathway analyses were performed using Reactome and gene set enrichment analysis was performed using GSEA 4.3.3.Quantitative proteomicsSample preparation, data collection, and statistical analysis performed by the IDeA National Resource for Quantitative Proteomics at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, as previously reported.47 Total protein from each sample was reduced, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and purified by chloroform/methanol extraction before digestion with sequencing grade trypsin. Peptides were separated by reverse phase Ion-Opticks-TS analytical column and stabilized with a Heater THOR Controller at 55°C. Peptides were trapped and eluted using a Vanquish Neo UHPLC nano system. Elution flow rate was 0.350μL/min using a 17 min gradient from 98% Buffer A:2% Buffer B to 96:4 at 0.1 min to 56:44 at 9.1 min followed by a wash of 45:55 at 11.7 min to 1:99 at 16.8 min back to 98:2 at 17.0 min. Peptides were ionized by electrospray followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Astral mass spectrometer. Precursor spectra were acquired from 380 to 980 Th, 240,000 resolution, normalized AGC target 200%, maximum injection time 3 ms.

STAR★Methods

Key resources table
REAGENT or RESOURCESOURCEIDENTIFIERAntibodiesMouse anti-H2Kb/H2DbBiolegendCat# 114608; RRID: AB_313598Mouse anti-H2Kb-SIINFEKLBiolegendCat# 141604; RRID:AB_10895905Mouse anti-PDL1BiolegendCat# 124312; RRID:AB_10612741Human anti-HLA/HLBBiolegendCat# 311406; RRID:AB_314875Human anti-PDL1BiolegendCat# 393610; RRID:AB_2749927Anti-EZH2Cell SignalingCat# 52468; RRID:AB_10694683Anti-GAPDHCell SignalingCat# 2118; RRID:AB_561053Human anti-AMPKCell SignalingCat# 2532; RRID:AB_330331Human anti-pAMPkCell SignalingCat# 2531; RRID:AB_330330Human anti-Beclin1Cell SignalingCat# 3738; RRID:AB_490837Human anti-ULK1Cell SignalingCat# 8054; RRID: AB_11178668Human anti-pULK1Cell SignalingCat# 6888; RRID:AB_10829226Human anti-RaptorCell SignalingCat# 2280; RRID:AB_561245Human anti-pRaptorCell SignalingCat# 2083; RRID:AB_330330Rabbit IgGMP BiomedicalsCat# 55944; RRID:AB_2334717Anti-H3K27me3AbcamCat#ab6002; RRID:AB_305237IgA DynaBeadsInvitrogenCat# 10001D; RRID:AB_2783043Bacterial and virus strainsIncucyte Nuclight Red titerSartoriusCat# 4625Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteinsPolybreneMilliporeCat# TR-1003 GRuxolitinibSelleckChemCat# S1378TazemetostatSelleckChemCat# S7128OligomycinAPExBioCat# A5588FCCPCayman ChemicalCat# 15218RotenoneAbcamCat# ab143145Antimycin AThermo FisherCat# J63522-MA2-DeoxyglucoseMilliporeCat# 154-17-6MetforminMilliporeCat# 1115-70-4Recombinant mouse IL-2PeproTechCat# 212-12Recombinant human IL-2PeproTechCat# 200-D2Mouse IFN-gBioLegendCat# 570204Human IFN-gBioLegendCat# 575304CyclohexamideMilliporeCat# C7698-1GCritical commercial assaysTaqMan miRNA RT kitApplied biosystemsCat# 4366596TaqMan miRNA AssayApplied biosystemsCat# A25576TaqMan miRNA hsa-miR-101Applied biosystemsCat# 002253TaqMan miRNA has-miR-26aApplied biosystemsCat# 000405RNEasy RNA Isolation KitQiagenCat# 74106iScript cDNA synthesis kitBioRadCat# 1708841SYBR Green Universal PCR mixBioRadCat# 1725124Deposited dataRaw and Analyzed Mass Spectrometry DataThis PaperProteomeXchange Dataset PXD054843Raw and Analyzed ChIP Sequencing DataThis PaperGSE297168Experimental models: Cell linesB16F10ATCCCat# CRL-6475MC38Sigma-AldrichCat# SCC172A375ATCCCat# CRL-1619A101DATCCCat# CRL-7898Experimental models: Organisms/strainsC57BL/6-Tg(TcraTcrb)1100Mjb/JJackson LabsCat# 003831OligonucleotidesSee Table S2 for qPCR primer listN/ASoftware and algorithmsFlowJoN/Ahttps://www.flowjo.com/Graphpad Prism 9.2N/Ahttps://www.graphpad.com/ImageJSchindelin et al.https://github.com/imagejSnapGeneN/Ahttps://www.snapgene.com/ImageLab 6.1N/A#12012931GSEA 4.3.3Subramanian et al, Mootha et al.http://www.broad.mit.edu/gsea/ReactomeMilacic et al.https://reactome.org/

Key resources table

REAGENT or RESOURCESOURCEIDENTIFIERAntibodiesMouse anti-H2Kb/H2DbBiolegendCat# 114608; RRID: AB_313598Mouse anti-H2Kb-SIINFEKLBiolegendCat# 141604; RRID:AB_10895905Mouse anti-PDL1BiolegendCat# 124312; RRID:AB_10612741Human anti-HLA/HLBBiolegendCat# 311406; RRID:AB_314875Human anti-PDL1BiolegendCat# 393610; RRID:AB_2749927Anti-EZH2Cell SignalingCat# 52468; RRID:AB_10694683Anti-GAPDHCell SignalingCat# 2118; RRID:AB_561053Human anti-AMPKCell SignalingCat# 2532; RRID:AB_330331Human anti-pAMPkCell SignalingCat# 2531; RRID:AB_330330Human anti-Beclin1Cell SignalingCat# 3738; RRID:AB_490837Human anti-ULK1Cell SignalingCat# 8054; RRID: AB_11178668Human anti-pULK1Cell SignalingCat# 6888; RRID:AB_10829226Human anti-RaptorCell SignalingCat# 2280; RRID:AB_561245Human anti-pRaptorCell SignalingCat# 2083; RRID:AB_330330Rabbit IgGMP BiomedicalsCat# 55944; RRID:AB_2334717Anti-H3K27me3AbcamCat#ab6002; RRID:AB_305237IgA DynaBeadsInvitrogenCat# 10001D; RRID:AB_2783043Bacterial and virus strainsIncucyte Nuclight Red titerSartoriusCat# 4625Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteinsPolybreneMilliporeCat# TR-1003 GRuxolitinibSelleckChemCat# S1378TazemetostatSelleckChemCat# S7128OligomycinAPExBioCat# A5588FCCPCayman ChemicalCat# 15218RotenoneAbcamCat# ab143145Antimycin AThermo FisherCat# J63522-MA2-DeoxyglucoseMilliporeCat# 154-17-6MetforminMilliporeCat# 1115-70-4Recombinant mouse IL-2PeproTechCat# 212-12Recombinant human IL-2PeproTechCat# 200-D2Mouse IFN-gBioLegendCat# 570204Human IFN-gBioLegendCat# 575304CyclohexamideMilliporeCat# C7698-1GCritical commercial assaysTaqMan miRNA RT kitApplied biosystemsCat# 4366596TaqMan miRNA AssayApplied biosystemsCat# A25576TaqMan miRNA hsa-miR-101Applied biosystemsCat# 002253TaqMan miRNA has-miR-26aApplied biosystemsCat# 000405RNEasy RNA Isolation KitQiagenCat# 74106iScript cDNA synthesis kitBioRadCat# 1708841SYBR Green Universal PCR mixBioRadCat# 1725124Deposited dataRaw and Analyzed Mass Spectrometry DataThis PaperProteomeXchange Dataset PXD054843Raw and Analyzed ChIP Sequencing DataThis PaperGSE297168Experimental models: Cell linesB16F10ATCCCat# CRL-6475MC38Sigma-AldrichCat# SCC172A375ATCCCat# CRL-1619A101DATCCCat# CRL-7898Experimental models: Organisms/strainsC57BL/6-Tg(TcraTcrb)1100Mjb/JJackson LabsCat# 003831OligonucleotidesSee Table S2 for qPCR primer listN/ASoftware and algorithmsFlowJoN/Ahttps://www.flowjo.com/Graphpad Prism 9.2N/Ahttps://www.graphpad.com/ImageJSchindelin et al.https://github.com/imagejSnapGeneN/Ahttps://www.snapgene.com/ImageLab 6.1N/A#12012931GSEA 4.3.3Subramanian et al, Mootha et al.http://www.broad.mit.edu/gsea/ReactomeMilacic et al.https://reactome.org/

Experimental model and study participant detailsCell lines and culture conditionsCell lines used in this study can be found in the key resources table. B16F10 JAK1 −/− and IFNAR1 −/− were a kind gift from the Antoni Ribas laboratory (University of California, Los Angeles). B16.SIINFEKLred cell line was created in the Tackett and Koss labs. Tumor cells were seeded and cultured under normal glucose (GLU) conditions (21% O2, 5% CO2, 4.5 g/L glucose) in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM), supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, 100 U/mL penicillin, 0.2% βME, and 2 mM L-glutamine. Tumor cells were additionally cultured in glucose-free DMEM with 10% dialyzed FBS and 4.6 g/L d-galactose (GAL) while keeping O2 and CO2 consistent. Once tumor cells in GAL conditions were able to reach confluency in a 10cm dish, the cells were considered successfully adapted.Spleens were harvested from OT-1 TCR transgenic mice and primary splenocytes were isolated. Splenocytes were separated into single-cell suspensions and isolated via a magnetic positive CD8+ selection kit (Miltenyi Biotec) before 72-h activation via αCD3/αCD28 stimulation. CD8+ T cells were cultured in RPMI (Life Technologies) with 10% FBS, 0.2% βME, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, 100 U/mL penicillin, 2 mM L-glutamine (Invitrogen), and recombinant mouse IL-2 (Novartis). Mice strains and T cell isolation kits can be found in the key resources table.All experiments were conducted under an IACUC-approved protocol for laboratory animals that conforms to the NIH guidelines. Experiments utilized both male and female mice, 6-8 weeks old, which were housed in specific pathogen-free conditions. These animals were utilized for experiments requiring murine primary cells (splenocytes, CD8+ T cells), not the live animals themselves. The protocols are approved by the UAMS Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) AUP #IPROTO202300000015, which support and include this work.Ethics and approval and consent to participateAll experiments were conducted under an IACUC-approved protocol for laboratory animals that conforms to the NIH guidelines. The protocols are approved by the UAMS Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) AUP #IPROTO202300000015, which support and include this work.

Experimental model and study participant details

Cell lines and culture conditionsCell lines used in this study can be found in the key resources table. B16F10 JAK1 −/− and IFNAR1 −/− were a kind gift from the Antoni Ribas laboratory (University of California, Los Angeles). B16.SIINFEKLred cell line was created in the Tackett and Koss labs. Tumor cells were seeded and cultured under normal glucose (GLU) conditions (21% O2, 5% CO2, 4.5 g/L glucose) in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM), supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, 100 U/mL penicillin, 0.2% βME, and 2 mM L-glutamine. Tumor cells were additionally cultured in glucose-free DMEM with 10% dialyzed FBS and 4.6 g/L d-galactose (GAL) while keeping O2 and CO2 consistent. Once tumor cells in GAL conditions were able to reach confluency in a 10cm dish, the cells were considered successfully adapted.Spleens were harvested from OT-1 TCR transgenic mice and primary splenocytes were isolated. Splenocytes were separated into single-cell suspensions and isolated via a magnetic positive CD8+ selection kit (Miltenyi Biotec) before 72-h activation via αCD3/αCD28 stimulation. CD8+ T cells were cultured in RPMI (Life Technologies) with 10% FBS, 0.2% βME, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, 100 U/mL penicillin, 2 mM L-glutamine (Invitrogen), and recombinant mouse IL-2 (Novartis). Mice strains and T cell isolation kits can be found in the key resources table.All experiments were conducted under an IACUC-approved protocol for laboratory animals that conforms to the NIH guidelines. Experiments utilized both male and female mice, 6-8 weeks old, which were housed in specific pathogen-free conditions. These animals were utilized for experiments requiring murine primary cells (splenocytes, CD8+ T cells), not the live animals themselves. The protocols are approved by the UAMS Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) AUP #IPROTO202300000015, which support and include this work.

Cell lines and culture conditions

Cell lines used in this study can be found in the key resources table. B16F10 JAK1 −/− and IFNAR1 −/− were a kind gift from the Antoni Ribas laboratory (University of California, Los Angeles). B16.SIINFEKLred cell line was created in the Tackett and Koss labs. Tumor cells were seeded and cultured under normal glucose (GLU) conditions (21% O2, 5% CO2, 4.5 g/L glucose) in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM), supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, 100 U/mL penicillin, 0.2% βME, and 2 mM L-glutamine. Tumor cells were additionally cultured in glucose-free DMEM with 10% dialyzed FBS and 4.6 g/L d-galactose (GAL) while keeping O2 and CO2 consistent. Once tumor cells in GAL conditions were able to reach confluency in a 10cm dish, the cells were considered successfully adapted.

Spleens were harvested from OT-1 TCR transgenic mice and primary splenocytes were isolated. Splenocytes were separated into single-cell suspensions and isolated via a magnetic positive CD8+ selection kit (Miltenyi Biotec) before 72-h activation via αCD3/αCD28 stimulation. CD8+ T cells were cultured in RPMI (Life Technologies) with 10% FBS, 0.2% βME, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, 100 U/mL penicillin, 2 mM L-glutamine (Invitrogen), and recombinant mouse IL-2 (Novartis). Mice strains and T cell isolation kits can be found in the key resources table.

All experiments were conducted under an IACUC-approved protocol for laboratory animals that conforms to the NIH guidelines. Experiments utilized both male and female mice, 6-8 weeks old, which were housed in specific pathogen-free conditions. These animals were utilized for experiments requiring murine primary cells (splenocytes, CD8+ T cells), not the live animals themselves. The protocols are approved by the UAMS Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) AUP #IPROTO202300000015, which support and include this work.

Ethics and approval and consent to participateAll experiments were conducted under an IACUC-approved protocol for laboratory animals that conforms to the NIH guidelines. The protocols are approved by the UAMS Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) AUP #IPROTO202300000015, which support and include this work.

Ethics and approval and consent to participate

All experiments were conducted under an IACUC-approved protocol for laboratory animals that conforms to the NIH guidelines. The protocols are approved by the UAMS Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) AUP #IPROTO202300000015, which support and include this work.

Method detailsGenerating B16.SIINFEKLred cellsTo generate B16.SIINFEKLred cells, B16.SIINFEKL cells were plated at 1.25 x 104 in 96-well plate with 50μL OptimMem (Gibco). Polybrene (final concentration of 4 μg/mL) and 35μL of Incucyte ® Nuclight Red Lentivirus titer (Sartorius #4625) were added. Cells were cultured for 7 days and sorted. For JAK1/2 inhibition, 4 μM Ruxolitinib (SelleckChem #S1378) was added in vitro for 48 h 2.5μM Tazemetostat (SelleckChem #S7128) was used to inhibit EZH2 activity.Metabolic profile analysisOxygen consumption rate (OCP) and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) were quantified using the Agilent Seahorse XPe96 Analyzer. Tumor cells were plated at 4x104 per well of a Seahorse XFe96 cell culture microplates. Cells were cultured under GLU and GAL conditions with 8 replicates per condition and plated in XF media (RPMI 1640 with 10mmol/L glucose, 2mmol/L L-glutamine, and 1mmol/L sodium pyruvate). The A-C ports in the lid were filled with the following: (a) 20μL 1μM Oligomycin [APExBio, #A5588] (b) 22μL of 2μM fluoro-carbonyl cyanide phenylhydrazone (FCCP) [Cayman, #15218] (c) 25μL of 0.5μM Rotenone [abcam, #ab143145]/antimycin A.In vitro killing assayCD8+ T cell killing was quantified by percent tumor (target) cells remaining. CD8+ T cells from wild-type C57BL/6 mice (control) or from transgenic OT-1 (tumor-specific mice) were activated prior to co-culture. Target cells (B16.SIINFEKLred) were plated 6 h prior to the addition of T cells. The co-culture was plated for 72h at different target: effector (T:E) ratios, including 1:1, 2:1, 4:1, 8:1, etc. Initial T cell killing was determined via flow cytometry through Annexin V staining. Larger killing assays were quantified using the ImageXpress HT.ai confocal imaging system (Molecular Devices). Plates were automatically imaged every 2 h and at each timepoint the total numbers of RFP+ (Target) cells was quantified. Cell count values were normalized to target cell counts at t = 0, and to the growth of cells at the 0:1 T:E ratio.Flow cytometry analysisTumor cells were plated in fresh media at 0.5 x 106 cells/mL in 96-well plates. Cells were cultured under normal glucose (GLU) or glucose-deprived (GAL) conditions. Other models of cellular stress include in vitro treatment with 2-deoxy-d-glucose (2-DG) and metformin. Prior to flow cytometry analysis for MHC-I expression, tumor cells were cultured for 24 h with 10mM 2-DG (ACROS, #111980050) or 10mM metformin (MP Bio, #151691). MHC-I surface expression was determined on a LSRFortessa flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) by staining for murine pan-MHC-I (Biolegend #114608), murine PDL1 (Biolegend #124312), human MHC-I (Biolegend #311406) and human PDL1 (Biolegend #393610). Cell viability was determined by DAPI staining. Samples gated and analyzed using FlowJo software (Tree Star).Quantitative PCRFor qPCR, was performed using the CFX96TM Real Time System (Biorad) with SYBR® Green Supermix (Biorad). The cycling conditions were set at 95°C for 3 min, followed by 40 cycles of 15 s at 95°C, 30 s at 60°C and 30 s at 72°C. Measurements were performed in triplicates. Ct-values were normalized to the expression of the housekeeping gene UBC or b-actin. Micro-RNA quantification was performed following the TaqMan miRNA isolation, reverse-transcription, and detection assays, according to manufacturer’s instructions.Western BlottingCellular protein extracts were isolated by directly adding RIPA buffer (10mM Tris-Cl, 1mM EDTA, 0.5mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 40mM NaCl) directly to tumor cells for 30 min. Protein concentrations were measured using BCA (Bicinchoninic acid) protein assay (Fisher). 20μg of protein extracts were separated on precast bis-Tris NuPage 4%-12% gels (Fisher). Afterwards, protein extracts were transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane using the iBlot 3 Western Blot Transfer System (Fisher). After transfer, membranes were blocked for 30min in 5 mL 5% Milk and probed overnight with primary antibody for AMPK (Cell Signaling #2532), pAMPK (Cell Signaling #2531), Beclin1 (Cell Signaling #3738), ULK1 (Cell Signaling #8054), pULK1 (Cell Signaling #6888), Raptor (Cell Signaling #2280), pRaptor (Cell Signaling #2083) or GAPDH (Cell Signaling #2118). membranes were washed 3 times with 5 mL 0.1% Tween/TBS and incubated with anti-rabbit IgG or anti-mouse IgG with HPR-linked antibody (Cell signaling #7074, #7075) for 1 h. Membranes were developed using Western Lightning Plus ECL enhanced chemiluminescent substrate (Perkin-Elmer) and analyzed with a Chemidoc imager (BioRad). Western-blots were quantified by measuring protein band intensity using imageJ software. Samples were normalized with beta-actin or GAPDH band intensity. For protein stability immunoblot, cells were grown with cyclohexamide ( for 0, 2, 4, and 8 h prior to harvest.Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)20 million B16F10 cells growing under GLU or GAL conditions were fixed in 1.1% PFA solution for 15 min. To quench the cross-linking, a final concentration of .125 M glycine was added for 5 min before cells were harvested. The cells were washed in chilled PBS with .5% Igepal twice, before adding PBS-Igepal with 1mM PMSF. The ChIP DNA samples were then submitted to Active Motif for preparation of libraries, sequencing, and analysis.ChIP sequencing and ChIP-PCRChIP-pcr was used to validate the H3K27me3 at loci of antigen presentation in B16F10 cells. 6x106 cells were resuspended in nChIP lysis buffer (250 mM Sucrose, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM Sodium Butyrate, 0.1% Triton X-100, 5 mM MgCl2, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 5 mM KCl) and transferred to a chilled dounce homogenizer for lysis. Nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation at 1000 x g for 10 min at 4°C, and resuspended in MNase digestion buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 5 mM CaCl2) for chromatin fragmentation. Chromatin were resolubilized in ice cold 10 mM EDTA before pre-clearing chromatin lysate with IgG-bound dynabeads (Fisher #10001D). H3K27me3 immunoprecipitation followed pre-clearing with H3K27me3 (Abcam #4729) conjugated Dynabeads. Bound chromatin was eluted from beads by shaking at 65°C in Elution Buffer (1% SDS, 100 mM Sodium Bicaronate, pH 8). DNA was extracted using QIAmp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen 51304), following the manufacturer’s instructions.

Method details

Generating B16.SIINFEKLred cellsTo generate B16.SIINFEKLred cells, B16.SIINFEKL cells were plated at 1.25 x 104 in 96-well plate with 50μL OptimMem (Gibco). Polybrene (final concentration of 4 μg/mL) and 35μL of Incucyte ® Nuclight Red Lentivirus titer (Sartorius #4625) were added. Cells were cultured for 7 days and sorted. For JAK1/2 inhibition, 4 μM Ruxolitinib (SelleckChem #S1378) was added in vitro for 48 h 2.5μM Tazemetostat (SelleckChem #S7128) was used to inhibit EZH2 activity.

Generating B16.SIINFEKLred cells

To generate B16.SIINFEKLred cells, B16.SIINFEKL cells were plated at 1.25 x 104 in 96-well plate with 50μL OptimMem (Gibco). Polybrene (final concentration of 4 μg/mL) and 35μL of Incucyte ® Nuclight Red Lentivirus titer (Sartorius #4625) were added. Cells were cultured for 7 days and sorted. For JAK1/2 inhibition, 4 μM Ruxolitinib (SelleckChem #S1378) was added in vitro for 48 h 2.5μM Tazemetostat (SelleckChem #S7128) was used to inhibit EZH2 activity.

Metabolic profile analysisOxygen consumption rate (OCP) and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) were quantified using the Agilent Seahorse XPe96 Analyzer. Tumor cells were plated at 4x104 per well of a Seahorse XFe96 cell culture microplates. Cells were cultured under GLU and GAL conditions with 8 replicates per condition and plated in XF media (RPMI 1640 with 10mmol/L glucose, 2mmol/L L-glutamine, and 1mmol/L sodium pyruvate). The A-C ports in the lid were filled with the following: (a) 20μL 1μM Oligomycin [APExBio, #A5588] (b) 22μL of 2μM fluoro-carbonyl cyanide phenylhydrazone (FCCP) [Cayman, #15218] (c) 25μL of 0.5μM Rotenone [abcam, #ab143145]/antimycin A.

Metabolic profile analysis

Oxygen consumption rate (OCP) and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) were quantified using the Agilent Seahorse XPe96 Analyzer. Tumor cells were plated at 4x104 per well of a Seahorse XFe96 cell culture microplates. Cells were cultured under GLU and GAL conditions with 8 replicates per condition and plated in XF media (RPMI 1640 with 10mmol/L glucose, 2mmol/L L-glutamine, and 1mmol/L sodium pyruvate). The A-C ports in the lid were filled with the following: (a) 20μL 1μM Oligomycin [APExBio, #A5588] (b) 22μL of 2μM fluoro-carbonyl cyanide phenylhydrazone (FCCP) [Cayman, #15218] (c) 25μL of 0.5μM Rotenone [abcam, #ab143145]/antimycin A.

In vitro killing assayCD8+ T cell killing was quantified by percent tumor (target) cells remaining. CD8+ T cells from wild-type C57BL/6 mice (control) or from transgenic OT-1 (tumor-specific mice) were activated prior to co-culture. Target cells (B16.SIINFEKLred) were plated 6 h prior to the addition of T cells. The co-culture was plated for 72h at different target: effector (T:E) ratios, including 1:1, 2:1, 4:1, 8:1, etc. Initial T cell killing was determined via flow cytometry through Annexin V staining. Larger killing assays were quantified using the ImageXpress HT.ai confocal imaging system (Molecular Devices). Plates were automatically imaged every 2 h and at each timepoint the total numbers of RFP+ (Target) cells was quantified. Cell count values were normalized to target cell counts at t = 0, and to the growth of cells at the 0:1 T:E ratio.

In vitro killing assay

CD8+ T cell killing was quantified by percent tumor (target) cells remaining. CD8+ T cells from wild-type C57BL/6 mice (control) or from transgenic OT-1 (tumor-specific mice) were activated prior to co-culture. Target cells (B16.SIINFEKLred) were plated 6 h prior to the addition of T cells. The co-culture was plated for 72h at different target: effector (T:E) ratios, including 1:1, 2:1, 4:1, 8:1, etc. Initial T cell killing was determined via flow cytometry through Annexin V staining. Larger killing assays were quantified using the ImageXpress HT.ai confocal imaging system (Molecular Devices). Plates were automatically imaged every 2 h and at each timepoint the total numbers of RFP+ (Target) cells was quantified. Cell count values were normalized to target cell counts at t = 0, and to the growth of cells at the 0:1 T:E ratio.

Flow cytometry analysisTumor cells were plated in fresh media at 0.5 x 106 cells/mL in 96-well plates. Cells were cultured under normal glucose (GLU) or glucose-deprived (GAL) conditions. Other models of cellular stress include in vitro treatment with 2-deoxy-d-glucose (2-DG) and metformin. Prior to flow cytometry analysis for MHC-I expression, tumor cells were cultured for 24 h with 10mM 2-DG (ACROS, #111980050) or 10mM metformin (MP Bio, #151691). MHC-I surface expression was determined on a LSRFortessa flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) by staining for murine pan-MHC-I (Biolegend #114608), murine PDL1 (Biolegend #124312), human MHC-I (Biolegend #311406) and human PDL1 (Biolegend #393610). Cell viability was determined by DAPI staining. Samples gated and analyzed using FlowJo software (Tree Star).

Flow cytometry analysis

Tumor cells were plated in fresh media at 0.5 x 106 cells/mL in 96-well plates. Cells were cultured under normal glucose (GLU) or glucose-deprived (GAL) conditions. Other models of cellular stress include in vitro treatment with 2-deoxy-d-glucose (2-DG) and metformin. Prior to flow cytometry analysis for MHC-I expression, tumor cells were cultured for 24 h with 10mM 2-DG (ACROS, #111980050) or 10mM metformin (MP Bio, #151691). MHC-I surface expression was determined on a LSRFortessa flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) by staining for murine pan-MHC-I (Biolegend #114608), murine PDL1 (Biolegend #124312), human MHC-I (Biolegend #311406) and human PDL1 (Biolegend #393610). Cell viability was determined by DAPI staining. Samples gated and analyzed using FlowJo software (Tree Star).

Quantitative PCRFor qPCR, was performed using the CFX96TM Real Time System (Biorad) with SYBR® Green Supermix (Biorad). The cycling conditions were set at 95°C for 3 min, followed by 40 cycles of 15 s at 95°C, 30 s at 60°C and 30 s at 72°C. Measurements were performed in triplicates. Ct-values were normalized to the expression of the housekeeping gene UBC or b-actin. Micro-RNA quantification was performed following the TaqMan miRNA isolation, reverse-transcription, and detection assays, according to manufacturer’s instructions.

Quantitative PCR

For qPCR, was performed using the CFX96TM Real Time System (Biorad) with SYBR® Green Supermix (Biorad). The cycling conditions were set at 95°C for 3 min, followed by 40 cycles of 15 s at 95°C, 30 s at 60°C and 30 s at 72°C. Measurements were performed in triplicates. Ct-values were normalized to the expression of the housekeeping gene UBC or b-actin. Micro-RNA quantification was performed following the TaqMan miRNA isolation, reverse-transcription, and detection assays, according to manufacturer’s instructions.

Western BlottingCellular protein extracts were isolated by directly adding RIPA buffer (10mM Tris-Cl, 1mM EDTA, 0.5mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 40mM NaCl) directly to tumor cells for 30 min. Protein concentrations were measured using BCA (Bicinchoninic acid) protein assay (Fisher). 20μg of protein extracts were separated on precast bis-Tris NuPage 4%-12% gels (Fisher). Afterwards, protein extracts were transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane using the iBlot 3 Western Blot Transfer System (Fisher). After transfer, membranes were blocked for 30min in 5 mL 5% Milk and probed overnight with primary antibody for AMPK (Cell Signaling #2532), pAMPK (Cell Signaling #2531), Beclin1 (Cell Signaling #3738), ULK1 (Cell Signaling #8054), pULK1 (Cell Signaling #6888), Raptor (Cell Signaling #2280), pRaptor (Cell Signaling #2083) or GAPDH (Cell Signaling #2118). membranes were washed 3 times with 5 mL 0.1% Tween/TBS and incubated with anti-rabbit IgG or anti-mouse IgG with HPR-linked antibody (Cell signaling #7074, #7075) for 1 h. Membranes were developed using Western Lightning Plus ECL enhanced chemiluminescent substrate (Perkin-Elmer) and analyzed with a Chemidoc imager (BioRad). Western-blots were quantified by measuring protein band intensity using imageJ software. Samples were normalized with beta-actin or GAPDH band intensity. For protein stability immunoblot, cells were grown with cyclohexamide ( for 0, 2, 4, and 8 h prior to harvest.

Western Blotting

Cellular protein extracts were isolated by directly adding RIPA buffer (10mM Tris-Cl, 1mM EDTA, 0.5mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 40mM NaCl) directly to tumor cells for 30 min. Protein concentrations were measured using BCA (Bicinchoninic acid) protein assay (Fisher). 20μg of protein extracts were separated on precast bis-Tris NuPage 4%-12% gels (Fisher). Afterwards, protein extracts were transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane using the iBlot 3 Western Blot Transfer System (Fisher). After transfer, membranes were blocked for 30min in 5 mL 5% Milk and probed overnight with primary antibody for AMPK (Cell Signaling #2532), pAMPK (Cell Signaling #2531), Beclin1 (Cell Signaling #3738), ULK1 (Cell Signaling #8054), pULK1 (Cell Signaling #6888), Raptor (Cell Signaling #2280), pRaptor (Cell Signaling #2083) or GAPDH (Cell Signaling #2118). membranes were washed 3 times with 5 mL 0.1% Tween/TBS and incubated with anti-rabbit IgG or anti-mouse IgG with HPR-linked antibody (Cell signaling #7074, #7075) for 1 h. Membranes were developed using Western Lightning Plus ECL enhanced chemiluminescent substrate (Perkin-Elmer) and analyzed with a Chemidoc imager (BioRad). Western-blots were quantified by measuring protein band intensity using imageJ software. Samples were normalized with beta-actin or GAPDH band intensity. For protein stability immunoblot, cells were grown with cyclohexamide ( for 0, 2, 4, and 8 h prior to harvest.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)20 million B16F10 cells growing under GLU or GAL conditions were fixed in 1.1% PFA solution for 15 min. To quench the cross-linking, a final concentration of .125 M glycine was added for 5 min before cells were harvested. The cells were washed in chilled PBS with .5% Igepal twice, before adding PBS-Igepal with 1mM PMSF. The ChIP DNA samples were then submitted to Active Motif for preparation of libraries, sequencing, and analysis.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)

20 million B16F10 cells growing under GLU or GAL conditions were fixed in 1.1% PFA solution for 15 min. To quench the cross-linking, a final concentration of .125 M glycine was added for 5 min before cells were harvested. The cells were washed in chilled PBS with .5% Igepal twice, before adding PBS-Igepal with 1mM PMSF. The ChIP DNA samples were then submitted to Active Motif for preparation of libraries, sequencing, and analysis.

ChIP sequencing and ChIP-PCRChIP-pcr was used to validate the H3K27me3 at loci of antigen presentation in B16F10 cells. 6x106 cells were resuspended in nChIP lysis buffer (250 mM Sucrose, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM Sodium Butyrate, 0.1% Triton X-100, 5 mM MgCl2, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 5 mM KCl) and transferred to a chilled dounce homogenizer for lysis. Nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation at 1000 x g for 10 min at 4°C, and resuspended in MNase digestion buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 5 mM CaCl2) for chromatin fragmentation. Chromatin were resolubilized in ice cold 10 mM EDTA before pre-clearing chromatin lysate with IgG-bound dynabeads (Fisher #10001D). H3K27me3 immunoprecipitation followed pre-clearing with H3K27me3 (Abcam #4729) conjugated Dynabeads. Bound chromatin was eluted from beads by shaking at 65°C in Elution Buffer (1% SDS, 100 mM Sodium Bicaronate, pH 8). DNA was extracted using QIAmp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen 51304), following the manufacturer’s instructions.

ChIP sequencing and ChIP-PCR

ChIP-pcr was used to validate the H3K27me3 at loci of antigen presentation in B16F10 cells. 6x106 cells were resuspended in nChIP lysis buffer (250 mM Sucrose, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM Sodium Butyrate, 0.1% Triton X-100, 5 mM MgCl2, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 5 mM KCl) and transferred to a chilled dounce homogenizer for lysis. Nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation at 1000 x g for 10 min at 4°C, and resuspended in MNase digestion buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 5 mM CaCl2) for chromatin fragmentation. Chromatin were resolubilized in ice cold 10 mM EDTA before pre-clearing chromatin lysate with IgG-bound dynabeads (Fisher #10001D). H3K27me3 immunoprecipitation followed pre-clearing with H3K27me3 (Abcam #4729) conjugated Dynabeads. Bound chromatin was eluted from beads by shaking at 65°C in Elution Buffer (1% SDS, 100 mM Sodium Bicaronate, pH 8). DNA was extracted using QIAmp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen 51304), following the manufacturer’s instructions.

Quantification and statistical analysisUnless otherwise stated in the specific methology section, comparisons for two groups, and three groups were calculated via unpaired Two-Tailed student’s t-tests and One-Way ANOVA analyses followed by multiple comparison tests. When compared over time, Two-Way ANOVA analyses were used with Sidak multiple comparison analysis. Survival data, plotted as Kaplan-Meier graphs, log-rank analyses were used to determine p values. Statistical significance was determined if p < 0.05, represented in figures by ∗.Statistical tests, unless otherwise described, were performed using GraphPad Prism 9.2. Pathway analyses were performed using Reactome and gene set enrichment analysis was performed using GSEA 4.3.3.Quantitative proteomicsSample preparation, data collection, and statistical analysis performed by the IDeA National Resource for Quantitative Proteomics at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, as previously reported.47 Total protein from each sample was reduced, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and purified by chloroform/methanol extraction before digestion with sequencing grade trypsin. Peptides were separated by reverse phase Ion-Opticks-TS analytical column and stabilized with a Heater THOR Controller at 55°C. Peptides were trapped and eluted using a Vanquish Neo UHPLC nano system. Elution flow rate was 0.350μL/min using a 17 min gradient from 98% Buffer A:2% Buffer B to 96:4 at 0.1 min to 56:44 at 9.1 min followed by a wash of 45:55 at 11.7 min to 1:99 at 16.8 min back to 98:2 at 17.0 min. Peptides were ionized by electrospray followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Astral mass spectrometer. Precursor spectra were acquired from 380 to 980 Th, 240,000 resolution, normalized AGC target 200%, maximum injection time 3 ms.

Quantification and statistical analysis

Unless otherwise stated in the specific methology section, comparisons for two groups, and three groups were calculated via unpaired Two-Tailed student’s t-tests and One-Way ANOVA analyses followed by multiple comparison tests. When compared over time, Two-Way ANOVA analyses were used with Sidak multiple comparison analysis. Survival data, plotted as Kaplan-Meier graphs, log-rank analyses were used to determine p values. Statistical significance was determined if p < 0.05, represented in figures by ∗.Statistical tests, unless otherwise described, were performed using GraphPad Prism 9.2. Pathway analyses were performed using Reactome and gene set enrichment analysis was performed using GSEA 4.3.3.

Quantitative proteomicsSample preparation, data collection, and statistical analysis performed by the IDeA National Resource for Quantitative Proteomics at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, as previously reported.47 Total protein from each sample was reduced, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and purified by chloroform/methanol extraction before digestion with sequencing grade trypsin. Peptides were separated by reverse phase Ion-Opticks-TS analytical column and stabilized with a Heater THOR Controller at 55°C. Peptides were trapped and eluted using a Vanquish Neo UHPLC nano system. Elution flow rate was 0.350μL/min using a 17 min gradient from 98% Buffer A:2% Buffer B to 96:4 at 0.1 min to 56:44 at 9.1 min followed by a wash of 45:55 at 11.7 min to 1:99 at 16.8 min back to 98:2 at 17.0 min. Peptides were ionized by electrospray followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Astral mass spectrometer. Precursor spectra were acquired from 380 to 980 Th, 240,000 resolution, normalized AGC target 200%, maximum injection time 3 ms.

Quantitative proteomics

Sample preparation, data collection, and statistical analysis performed by the IDeA National Resource for Quantitative Proteomics at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, as previously reported.47 Total protein from each sample was reduced, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and purified by chloroform/methanol extraction before digestion with sequencing grade trypsin. Peptides were separated by reverse phase Ion-Opticks-TS analytical column and stabilized with a Heater THOR Controller at 55°C. Peptides were trapped and eluted using a Vanquish Neo UHPLC nano system. Elution flow rate was 0.350μL/min using a 17 min gradient from 98% Buffer A:2% Buffer B to 96:4 at 0.1 min to 56:44 at 9.1 min followed by a wash of 45:55 at 11.7 min to 1:99 at 16.8 min back to 98:2 at 17.0 min. Peptides were ionized by electrospray followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Astral mass spectrometer. Precursor spectra were acquired from 380 to 980 Th, 240,000 resolution, normalized AGC target 200%, maximum injection time 3 ms.
