---
pmid: '15695819'
title: AMP-activated protein kinase beta subunit tethers alpha and gamma subunits
  via its C-terminal sequence (186-270).
authors:
- Iseli TJ
- Walter M
- van Denderen BJ
- Katsis F
- Witters LA
- Kemp BE
- Michell BJ
- Stapleton D
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M412993200
---

# AMP-activated protein kinase beta subunit tethers alpha and gamma subunits via its C-terminal sequence (186-270).
**Authors:** Iseli TJ, Walter M, van Denderen BJ, Katsis F, Witters LA, Kemp BE, Michell BJ, Stapleton D
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M412993200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M412993200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 8;280(14):13395-400. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M412993200. Epub 
2005 Jan 28.

AMP-activated protein kinase beta subunit tethers alpha and gamma subunits via 
its C-terminal sequence (186-270).

Iseli TJ(1), Walter M, van Denderen BJ, Katsis F, Witters LA, Kemp BE, Michell 
BJ, Stapleton D.

Author information:
(1)St. Vincent's Institute, University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is an important metabolic stress-sensing 
protein kinase responsible for regulating metabolism in response to changing 
energy demand and nutrient supply. Mammalian AMPK is a stable alphabetagamma 
heterotrimer comprising a catalytic alpha and two non-catalytic subunits, beta 
and gamma. The beta subunit targets AMPK to membranes via an N-terminal 
myristoyl group and to glycogen via a mid-molecule glycogen-binding domain. Here 
we find that the conserved C-terminal 85-residue sequence of the beta subunit, 
beta1-(186-270), is sufficient to form an active AMP-dependent heterotrimer 
alpha1beta1-(186-270)-gamma1, whereas the 25-residue beta1 C-terminal (246-270) 
sequence is sufficient to bind gamma1, gamma2, or gamma3 but not the alpha 
subunit. Deletion of the beta C-terminal Ile-270 precludes betagamma association 
in the absence of the alpha subunit, but the presence of the alpha subunit or 
substitution of Ile-270 with Ala or Glu restores betagamma binding. Truncation 
of the alpha subunit reveals that beta1 binding requires the alpha1-(313-473) 
sequence. The conserved C-terminal 85-residue sequence of the beta subunit (90% 
between beta1 and beta2) is the primary alphagamma binding sequence responsible 
for the formation of the AMPK alphabetagamma heterotrimer.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M412993200
PMID: 15695819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
