---
pmid: '14562095'
title: Global analysis of protein localization in budding yeast.
authors:
- Huh WK
- Falvo JV
- Gerke LC
- Carroll AS
- Howson RW
- Weissman JS
- O'Shea EK
journal: Nature
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature02026
---

# Global analysis of protein localization in budding yeast.
**Authors:** Huh WK, Falvo JV, Gerke LC, Carroll AS, Howson RW, Weissman JS, O'Shea EK
**Journal:** Nature (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature02026](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature02026)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2003 Oct 16;425(6959):686-91. doi: 10.1038/nature02026.

Global analysis of protein localization in budding yeast.

Huh WK(1), Falvo JV, Gerke LC, Carroll AS, Howson RW, Weissman JS, O'Shea EK.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California-San Francisco, 
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, 600 16th Street, San Francisco, 
California 94143-2240, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2003 Oct 16;425(6959):671-2. doi: 10.1038/425671a.

A fundamental goal of cell biology is to define the functions of proteins in the 
context of compartments that organize them in the cellular environment. Here we 
describe the construction and analysis of a collection of yeast strains 
expressing full-length, chromosomally tagged green fluorescent protein fusion 
proteins. We classify these proteins, representing 75% of the yeast proteome, 
into 22 distinct subcellular localization categories, and provide localization 
information for 70% of previously unlocalized proteins. Analysis of this 
high-resolution, high-coverage localization data set in the context of 
transcriptional, genetic, and protein-protein interaction data helps reveal the 
logic of transcriptional co-regulation, and provides a comprehensive view of 
interactions within and between organelles in eukaryotic cells.

DOI: 10.1038/nature02026
PMID: 14562095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
