---
pmid: '12566387'
title: Constitutive knockout of Surf1 is associated with high embryonic lethality,
  mitochondrial disease and cytochrome c oxidase deficiency in mice.
authors:
- Agostino A
- Invernizzi F
- Tiveron C
- Fagiolari G
- Prelle A
- Lamantea E
- Giavazzi A
- Battaglia G
- Tatangelo L
- Tiranti V
- Zeviani M
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg038
---

# Constitutive knockout of Surf1 is associated with high embryonic lethality, mitochondrial disease and cytochrome c oxidase deficiency in mice.
**Authors:** Agostino A, Invernizzi F, Tiveron C, Fagiolari G, Prelle A, Lamantea E, Giavazzi A, Battaglia G, Tatangelo L, Tiranti V, Zeviani M
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddg038](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddg038)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Feb 15;12(4):399-413. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg038.

Constitutive knockout of Surf1 is associated with high embryonic lethality, 
mitochondrial disease and cytochrome c oxidase deficiency in mice.

Agostino A(1), Invernizzi F, Tiveron C, Fagiolari G, Prelle A, Lamantea E, 
Giavazzi A, Battaglia G, Tatangelo L, Tiranti V, Zeviani M.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Molecular Neurogenetics, Pierfranco and Luisa Mariani Center for the 
Study of Children's Mitochondrial Disorders, Istituto Nazionale Neurologico C. 
Besta-IRCCS, Milano, Italy.

We report here the creation of a constitutive knockout mouse for SURF1, a gene 
encoding one of the assembly proteins involved in the formation of cytochrome c 
oxidase (COX). Loss-of-function mutations of SURF1 cause Leigh syndrome 
associated with an isolated and generalized COX deficiency in humans. The murine 
phenotype is characterized by the following hallmarks: (1) high 
post-implantation embryonic lethality, affecting approximately 90% of the 
Surf1(-/-) individuals; (2) early-onset mortality of post-natal individuals; (3) 
highly significant deficit in muscle strength and motor performance; (4) 
profound and isolated defect of COX activity in skeletal muscle and liver, and, 
to a lesser extent, heart and brain; (5) morphological abnormalities of skeletal 
muscle, characterized by reduced histochemical reaction to COX and mitochondrial 
proliferation; (6) no obvious abnormalities in brain morphology, reflecting the 
virtual absence of overt neurological symptoms. These results indicate a 
function for murine Surf1 protein (Surf1p) specifically related to COX and 
recapitulate, at least in part, the human phenotype. This is the first mammalian 
model for a nuclear disease gene of a human mitochondrial disorder. Our model 
constitutes a useful tool to investigate the function of Surf1p, help understand 
the pathogenesis of Surf1p deficiency in vivo, and evaluate the efficacy of 
treatment.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddg038
PMID: 12566387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
