---
pmid: '16099937'
title: Analysis of albumin-associated peptides and proteins from ovarian cancer patients.
authors:
- Lowenthal MS
- Mehta AI
- Frogale K
- Bandle RW
- Araujo RP
- Hood BL
- Veenstra TD
- Conrads TP
- Goldsmith P
- Fishman D
- Petricoin EF 3rd
- Liotta LA
journal: Clin Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2005.052944
---

# Analysis of albumin-associated peptides and proteins from ovarian cancer patients.
**Authors:** Lowenthal MS, Mehta AI, Frogale K, Bandle RW, Araujo RP, Hood BL, Veenstra TD, Conrads TP, Goldsmith P, Fishman D, Petricoin EF 3rd, Liotta LA
**Journal:** Clin Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1373/clinchem.2005.052944](https://doi.org/10.1373/clinchem.2005.052944)

## Abstract

1. Clin Chem. 2005 Oct;51(10):1933-45. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2005.052944. Epub
2005  Aug 11.

Analysis of albumin-associated peptides and proteins from ovarian cancer 
patients.

Lowenthal MS(1), Mehta AI, Frogale K, Bandle RW, Araujo RP, Hood BL, Veenstra 
TD, Conrads TP, Goldsmith P, Fishman D, Petricoin EF 3rd, Liotta LA.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Albumin binds low-molecular-weight molecules, including proteins and 
peptides, which then acquire its longer half-life, thereby protecting the bound 
species from kidney clearance. We developed an experimental method to isolate 
albumin in its native state and to then identify [mass spectrometry (MS) 
sequencing] the corresponding bound low-molecular-weight molecules. We used this 
method to analyze pooled sera from a human disease study set (high-risk persons 
without cancer, n = 40; stage I ovarian cancer, n = 30; stage III ovarian 
cancer, n = 40) to demonstrate the feasibility of this approach as a discovery 
method.
METHODS: Albumin was isolated by solid-phase affinity capture under native 
binding and washing conditions. Captured albumin-associated proteins and 
peptides were separated by gel electrophoresis and subjected to iterative MS 
sequencing by microcapillary reversed-phase tandem MS. Selected albumin-bound 
protein fragments were confirmed in human sera by Western blotting and 
immunocompetition.
RESULTS: In total, 1208 individual protein sequences were predicted from all 3 
pools. The predicted sequences were largely fragments derived from proteins with 
diverse biological functions. More than one third of these fragments were 
identified by multiple peptide sequences, and more than one half of the 
identified species were in vivo cleavage products of parent proteins. An 
estimated 700 serum peptides or proteins were predicted that had not been 
reported in previous serum databases. Several proteolytic fragments of larger 
molecules that may be cancer-related were confirmed immunologically in blood by 
Western blotting and peptide immunocompetition. BRCA2, a 390-kDa low-abundance 
nuclear protein linked to cancer susceptibility, was represented in sera as a 
series of specific fragments bound to albumin.
CONCLUSION: Carrier-protein harvesting provides a rich source of candidate 
peptides and proteins with potential diverse tissue and cellular origins that 
may reflect important disease-related information.

DOI: 10.1373/clinchem.2005.052944
PMID: 16099937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
