---
pmid: '21832193'
title: TRPM7 is required within zebrafish sensory neurons for the activation of touch-evoked
  escape behaviors.
authors:
- Low SE
- Amburgey K
- Horstick E
- Linsley J
- Sprague SM
- Cui WW
- Zhou W
- Hirata H
- Saint-Amant L
- Hume RI
- Kuwada JY
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3164782
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4950-10.2011
---

# TRPM7 is required within zebrafish sensory neurons for the activation of touch-evoked escape behaviors.
**Authors:** Low SE, Amburgey K, Horstick E, Linsley J, Sprague SM, Cui WW, Zhou W, Hirata H, Saint-Amant L, Hume RI, Kuwada JY
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4950-10.2011](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4950-10.2011)
**PMC:** [PMC3164782](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3164782/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2011 Aug 10;31(32):11633-44. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4950-10.2011.

TRPM7 is required within zebrafish sensory neurons for the activation of 
touch-evoked escape behaviors.

Low SE(1), Amburgey K, Horstick E, Linsley J, Sprague SM, Cui WW, Zhou W, Hirata 
H, Saint-Amant L, Hume RI, Kuwada JY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 48109-1048, USA.

Mutations in the gene encoding TRPM7 (trpm7), a member of the Transient Receptor 
Potential (TRP) superfamily of cation channels that possesses an enzymatically 
active kinase at its C terminus, cause the touch-unresponsive zebrafish mutant 
touchdown. We identified and characterized a new allele of touchdown, as well as 
two previously reported alleles, and found that all three alleles harbor 
mutations that abolish channel activity. Through the selective restoration of 
TRPM7 expression in sensory neurons, we found that TRPM7's kinase activity and 
selectivity for divalent cations over monovalent cations were dispensable for 
touch-evoked activation of escape behaviors in zebrafish. Additional 
characterization revealed that sensory neurons were present and capable of 
responding to tactile stimuli in touchdown mutants, indicating that TRPM7 is not 
required for sensory neuron survival or mechanosensation. Finally, exposure to 
elevated concentrations of divalent cations was found to restore touch-evoked 
behaviors in touchdown mutants. Collectively, these findings are consistent with 
a role for zebrafish TRPM7 within sensory neurons in the modulation of 
neurotransmitter release at central synapses, similar to that proposed for 
mammalian TRPM7 at peripheral synapses.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4950-10.2011
PMCID: PMC3164782
PMID: 21832193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Mutations in the gene encoding TRPM7 ( trpm7 ), a member of the Transient Receptor Potential (TRP) superfamily of cation channels that possesses an enzymatically active kinase at its C terminus, cause the touch-unresponsive zebrafish mutant touchdown . We identified and characterized a new allele of touchdown , as well as two previously reported alleles, and found that all three alleles harbor mutations that abolish channel activity. Through the selective restoration of TRPM7 expression in sensory neurons, we found that TRPM7's kinase activity and selectivity for divalent cations over monovalent cations were dispensable for touch-evoked activation of escape behaviors in zebrafish.

Additional characterization revealed that sensory neurons were present and capable of responding to tactile stimuli in touchdown mutants, indicating that TRPM7 is not required for sensory neuron survival or mechanosensation. Finally, exposure to elevated concentrations of divalent cations was found to restore touch-evoked behaviors in touchdown mutants. Collectively, these findings are consistent with a role for zebrafish TRPM7 within sensory neurons in the modulation of neurotransmitter release at central synapses, similar to that proposed for mammalian TRPM7 at peripheral synapses.

Introduction

TRPM7, a member of the Transient Receptor Potential (TRP) superfamily of cation channels, represents one of only two known ion channels to possess an enzymatically active kinase tethered to its C terminus ( Montell, 2005 ). Since the identification of this unusual pairing of an ion channel with a kinase ( Runnels et al., 2001 ), several studies have been undertaken to determine whether TRPM7's kinase regulates channel activity. From these studies ( Nadler et al., 2001 ; Schmitz et al., 2003 ; Matsushita et al., 2005 ), TRPM7's kinase activity has been deemed dispensable for channel function. However, these studies have been performed in heterologous expression systems, and therefore the contribution of kinase activity to channel function in a native cell in vivo has yet to be addressed.

Beyond a potential interplay between kinase activity and channel function, other studies have sought to elucidate the cellular role(s) for this dual function protein that is conserved among vertebrates. These studies in native cells using pharmacological agents and knock-out strategies have, however, been hampered by the absence of TRPM7-specific antagonists and the finding that the loss of trpm7 in mice is embryonically lethal ( Jin et al., 2008 ). Despite these hurdles, TRPM7 kinase activity has been linked to the phosphorylation of several intracellular proteins ( Dorovkov and Ryazanov, 2004 ; Clark et al., 2006 , 2008 ), while TRPM7 channel activity has been implicated in a wide range of cellular processes including mechanotransduction ( Numata et al., 2007a , b ), transmitter release ( Krapivinsky et al., 2006 ; Brauchi et al., 2008 ), pacemaker activity of gut cells ( Kim et al., 2005 ), and cell survival ( Nadler et al., 2001 ) via Mg 2+ homeostasis ( Schmitz et al., 2003 ). However, more recent results have cast doubt as to TRPM7's role in Mg 2+ homeostasis ( Jin et al., 2008 ). Thus, questions regarding the function of TRPM7 are still outstanding.

Our investigation of TRPM7 began with the isolation of a touch-unresponsive zebrafish mutant that was subsequently mapped to the touchdown locus, the gene known to encode TRPM7 ( Elizondo et al., 2005 ). The cloning of trpm7 from this new allele of touchdown revealed a nonsense mutation that truncates TRPM7 before the pore and kinase domains. Given that zebrafish embryos develop externally, and that touchdown mutants are viable into early juvenile stages, we used this new allele of touchdown to explore the putative roles for TRPM7 in vivo . One possibility consistent with our findings is that TRPM7 channel activity contributes to transmitter release at central synapses, similar to that proposed for mammalian TRPM7 at peripheral synapses.

Thetouchdownphenotype results from the loss of larval TRPM7

A possible explanation for the lack of a phenotype at 24 hpf in touchdown mutants is that TRPM7 is required for tactile responses at all developmental stages, but early in development, sufficient wild-type maternal RNA transcripts or protein are inherited to transiently compensate for nonfunctional TRPM7 made by touchdown mutants. Unfortunately, commercially available antibodies for mammalian TRPM7 failed to recognize zebrafish TRPM7, and therefore we were not able to test whether maternally inherited TRPM7 protein was present in the early larvae. However, a trpm7 transcript was identified by RT-PCR from RNA obtained at the one-cell stage, a time point preceding the initiation of zygotic transcription. To determine whether the maternally inherited trpm7 RNA accounted for the early period of touch responsiveness in zebrafish, an antisense [morpholino oligonucleotide (MO)] against trpm7 was injected into wild-type embryos at the one-cell stage, which should block the translation of both the maternal and zygotic mRNAs. We found that TRPM7 MO-injected wild-type embryos responded to touch with escape contractions at 24 hpf ( Fig. 3 A ), but were unresponsive to touch at 55 hpf. Thus, the TRPM7 MO reproduced the touchdown mutant phenotype, which suggests that maternally inherited wild-type trpm7 transcripts do not account for the early period of touch responsiveness in touchdown mutants.

Within the TRP family, TRPM6 is most similar to TRPM7 and is the only other TRP channel with an enzymatically active kinase on its C terminus. We therefore tested whether TRPM6 was necessary for the early touch-evoked contractions present in touchdown mutants. A zebrafish TRPM6 cDNA that encoded an 1875 aa peptide with 70% conserved sequence similarity to mouse TRPM6 was identified ( Fig. 3 B ). RNA encoding TRPM6 produced currents similar to zebrafish TRPM7 when expressed by oocytes ( Fig. 3 C ). Wild-type embryos injected with an antisense morpholino oligonucleotide directed against TRPM6 ( trpm6 MO), which blocked the production of TRPM6 currents in oocytes coinjected with trpm6 RNA and the antisense MO, responded to tactile stimuli at 24 hpf with contractions similar to uninjected and control morpholino-injected embryos ( Fig. 3 A ). Furthermore, all trpm6 MO-injected embryos responded to touch at 55 hpf with swimming ( n > 60 from three clutches). Thus, TRPM6 does not appear to be essential for touch-evoked escape behaviors during the first 3 d of development.

Discussion

The work reported here began with the isolation of a new allele of the zebrafish mutant touchdown that, similar to previously isolated alleles of touchdown , yielded offspring that were hypopigmented and displayed a transient loss of touch-evoked behaviors on the third day of development. We used this new allele of touchdown ( tdo mi174 ) to investigate the in vivo contribution of TRPM7's kinase activity and ion selectivity, and then explored several of the in vivo putative roles for TRPM7.
