---
pmid: '15930293'
title: BRCA2 suppresses cell proliferation via stabilizing MAGE-D1.
authors:
- Tian XX
- Rai D
- Li J
- Zou C
- Bai Y
- Wazer D
- Band V
- Gao Q
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2005'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC3295243
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-0018
---

# BRCA2 suppresses cell proliferation via stabilizing MAGE-D1.
**Authors:** Tian XX, Rai D, Li J, Zou C, Bai Y, Wazer D, Band V, Gao Q
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-0018](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-0018)
**PMC:** [PMC3295243](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3295243/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 2005 Jun 1;65(11):4747-53. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-0018.

BRCA2 suppresses cell proliferation via stabilizing MAGE-D1.

Tian XX(1), Rai D, Li J, Zou C, Bai Y, Wazer D, Band V, Gao Q.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Biology, Evanston Northwestern Healthcare Research 
Institute, Department of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Evanston, Illinois 60201, USA.

Germ line mutations in BRCA2 gene predispose women to early-onset familial 
breast and ovarian cancer. BRCA2 is a protein of multiple functions. In addition 
to its role in DNA double-strand break repair, BRCA2 also plays a role in 
stabilization of stalled DNA replication forks, cytokinesis, transcription 
regulation, mammalian gametogenesis, centrosome duplication, and suppression of 
cell proliferation. However, how BRCA2 mutations predispose women specifically 
to breast and ovarian cancer remains undefined. Here we found that BRCA2 binds 
and stabilizes MAGE-D1, a member of the MAGE gene family of proteins. Expression 
of BRCA2 and MAGE-D1 synergistically suppresses cell proliferation independently 
of the p53 pathway. Using two MAGE-D1 RNA interferences and two cell lines 
expressing low or undetectable levels of MAGE-D1, we further showed that the 
expression of MAGE-D1 is required for BRCA2-mediated suppression of cell 
proliferation, indicating that MAGE-D1 is a downstream target of BRCA2 and that 
BRCA2 suppresses cell proliferation via stabilizing MAGE-D1. Importantly, 
MAGE-D1 protein expression was reduced in 6 of 16 breast carcinoma cell lines 
tested as compared with untransformed immortal mammary epithelial cell lines, 
suggesting that suppression of MAGE-D1 expression may be involved in the 
tumorigenesis of a subset of sporadic breast cancers.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-0018
PMCID: PMC3295243
PMID: 15930293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Germline mutations in BRCA2 gene predispose women to early-onset familial breast and ovarian cancer. BRCA2 is a protein of multiple functions. In addition to its role in DNA double-strand breaks repair, BRCA2 also plays a role in stabilization of stalled DNA replication forks, cytokinesis, transcription regulation, mammalian gametogenesis, centrosome duplication, and suppression of cell proliferation. However, how BRCA2 mutations predispose women specifically to breast and ovarian cancer remains undefined. Here we found that BRCA2 binds and stabilizes MAGE-D1, a member of the MAGE gene family of proteins. Expression of BRCA2 and MAGE-D1 synergistically suppresses cell proliferation independently of the p53 pathway. Using two MAGE-D1 RNAis and two cell lines expressing low or undetectable levels of MAGE-D1, we further demonstrated that the expression of MAGE-D1 is required for BRCA2-mediated suppression of cell proliferation, indicating that MAGE-D1 is a downstream target of BRCA2 and that BRCA2 suppresses cell proliferation via stabilizing MAGE-D1. Importantly, MAGE-D1 protein expression was reduced in 6 out of 16 breast carcinoma cell lines tested as compared with untransformed immortal mammary epithelial cell lines, suggesting that suppression of MAGE-D1 expression may be involved in the tumorigenesis of a subset of sporadic breast cancers.

Introduction

Germ-line mutations in the breast cancer susceptibility gene BRCA2 confer susceptibility to familial early-onset breast and ovarian cancers ( 1 - 3 ). However, mutation of the BRCA2 gene in sporadic breast cancer rarely occurs ( 4 ). BRCA2 is a large protein of multiple functions. Extensive studies indicate that BRCA2 plays an important role in DNA damage repair by homologous recombination ( 5 - 13 ). BRCA2 also plays an important role in transcription regulation ( 13 ), centrosome duplication ( 14 ), cytokinesis ( 15 ), mammalian gametogenesis ( 16 ), and stabilization of stalled DNA replication forks ( 17 ). Importantly, BRCA2 inhibits tumor cell proliferation in vitro and tumor growth in vivo ( 18 ). However, how BRCA2 mediates the negative regulation of cell proliferation remains undefined.

The MAGE (MAGE for melanoma antigen) family contains a large group of proteins that harbor the MAGE homology domain, a well-conserved domain of about 200 amino acids ( 19 ). Members of the hMAGE-A, -B, and -C subfamilies are completely silent in most normal tissues, the exceptions being male germ cells, and, for some members of the subfamilies, the placenta ( 19 ). However, many members of the MAGE family are expressed in tumor cells of various histological types, and thus are of particular interest for anti-tumor immunotherapy. Members of the hMAGE-D, hMAGE-E, hMAGE-F, hMAGE-G, and hMAGE-H subfamilies exhibit a “ubiquitous” expression pattern; that is, they are expressed in many normal tissues at various levels ( 19 ). Recent studies indicate that MAGE-D1 is a regulator of apoptosis, transcription, and cell cycle progression ( 19 ). MAGE-D1 has been found to interact with Dlx/Msx homedomain proteins and is required for Dlx5-dependent transcription ( 20 ). Recently it was reported that MAGE-D1 cooperated with Necdin, another MAGE family protein, to regulate the function of Msx homeodomain proteins in cellular differentiation ( 21 ). MAGE-D1 also interacts with inhibitors of apoptosis proteins (IAPs), ubiquitin ligase praja1, axon guidance receptor UNC5H, and Ror receptor kinases ( 22 - 25 ). MAGE-D1 has also been reported to bind to p75 neurotrophin receptor and to mediate nerve growth-factor-dependent apoptosis ( 26 ).

In this study, using a conserved fragment of BRCA2 as bait, we identified MAGE-D1 as a BRCA2 binding protein and demonstrated that BRCA2 and MAGE-D1 interacted in vivo. Moreover, BRCA2 can stabilize MAGE-D1 and expression of BRCA2 and MAGE-D1 can suppress cell proliferation synergistically independently of p53 pathway. We also found that BRCA2 mediated-growth suppression is dependent on the expression of MAGE-D1, suggesting that MAGE-D1 is likely a downstream target of BRCA2. Importantly, MAGE-D1 expression was reduced in 6 out of 16 breast carcinoma cell lines tested as compared with untransformed immortal mammary epithelial cells, indicating that suppression of MAGE-D1 expression may disrupt the function of BRCA2 and play a role in the tumorigenesis of a subset of sporadic breast cancers.

Discussion

To identify molecules involved in BRCA2 functions, we performed yeast two-hybrid screening and identified MAGE-D1 as a BRCA2 binding protein. We demonstrated that endogenous BRCA2 and MAGE-D1 can interact in vivo . We also made the important observation that BRCA2 can stabilize MAGE-D1. Expression of BRCA2 and MAGE-D1 synergistically suppresses the proliferation of mammary epithelial cells independently of the p53 pathway. Furthermore, we demonstrated that MAGE-D1 acts downstream of BRCA2 and that BRCA2 suppresses cell proliferation via stabilizing MAGE-D1.

Using a set of BRCA2 mutants, we determined that the only MAGE-D1-binding domain on BRCA2 localizes to a region between residues 2393 and 2952 in the BRCA2 protein. It is notable that this region of BRCA2 encompasses almost the entire DSS1 binding domain (aa 2472-2957), the major part of BRCA2DBD (the DNA/DSS1-bindingdomain), and one of the FANCG binding domains (aa 2350–2545) ( 12 , 37 , 38 ). This region has been reported to play an important role in double-strand DNA breaks repair via homologous recombination and activation of the Fanconi anemia pathway ( 12 , 37 , 38 ). However, the functional implication of BRCA2 binding to MAGE-D1, DSS1, and FANCG at this region remain to be determined.

How BRCA2 stabilizes MAGE-D1 remains to be elucidated. It has recently been reported that BRCA2 can be co-purified with a ubiquitin E3 ligase complex, a holoenzyme complex termed BRCC that contains BRCA1, BARD1, BRCC36, and BRCC45. BRCA1 and BARD1 are proteins with a ring domain and exhibit ubiquitin ligase activities ( 18 ). Both BRCC36 and BRCC45 harbor sequence homologous to a subunit of the signalosome and proteasome complexes. A reconstituted complex containing BRCA1/BARD1/BRCC45/BRCC36 exhibits strong ubiquitin ligase activity ( 18 ). However, the way in which BRCA2 affects the ubiquitin ligase activity of BRCC holoenzyme has not been defined. Another recent study found that BRCA2 also interacts with a deubiquitinating enzyme, USP11 ( 39 ). An important BRCA2 binding protein, DSS1, was also found to be a component of the lid complex of the 26S proteasome ( 40 , 41 ). The relationships among these BRCA2 containing complexes and their functions need to be elucidated. However, since all these BRCA2-containing complexes are likely to regulate protein degradation, it is reasonable to hypothesize that they regulate the stability of many target proteins. MAGE-D1 may be one of these target proteins and its stability may be regulated by these BRCA2-containing complexes.

It has been reported that expression of BRCA2 suppresses cell growth in vitro and tumor growth in vivo ( 18 ). However, the mechanism that BRCA2 suppresses cell proliferation remains undefined. Our finding that BRCA2 is able to suppress cell proliferation only in the presence of MAGE-D1 expression strongly indicates that BRCA2 exerts its function via stabilizing MAGE-D1. MAGE-D1 has been reported to suppress cell proliferation in several cell lines, including 293 cells, MEF cells, U2OS cells, and HepG2 cells ( 26 , 35 ). Using p53 null MEF cells, it was found that MAGE-D1-mediated-suppression of cell proliferation occurs via the p53 pathway. However, our demonstration that MAGE-D1 can suppress cell proliferation in a p53 null mammary epithelial cell line, 76R30 cells ( 36 ), indicates that in mammary epithelial cells MAGE-D1 suppresses cell proliferation independently of the p53 pathway ( Fig. 4 ). In corroboration of this finding, we found that MAGE-D1 is also capable of inhibiting the proliferation of HeLa cells, which express only a very low level of p53 due to the presence of HPV16 E6 ( Fig. 5C ). Furthermore, the previous report that MAGE-D1 can suppress the proliferation of 293 cells further supports our finding because the p53 in 293 cells is inactive due to the presence of E1B ( 26 ). This discrepancy may represent a cell-type-specific function of MAGE-D1.

At present, we can only speculate about how MAGE-D1 inhibits cell proliferation independently of the p53 pathway. Many MAGE-D1 partners have been identified recently, including homeodomain transcription factors Dlx5, Dlx7, Msx1, and Msx2, p75 neurotrophin receptor, axon guidance receptor UNC5H, inhibitors of apoptosis proteins (IAPs), ubiquitin ligase praja1, and Ror receptor kinases ( 19 - 26 ). Some of these MAGE-D1 binding partners may mediate the growth-suppressing function of MAGE-D1. Kuwajima T et al. recently reported that Necdin interacts with Msx homeodomain proteins via MAGE-D1 and promotes muscle differentiation by repressing cellular proliferation ( 21 ). It is likely that MAGE-D1cooperates with Necdin to suppress cell proliferation via Msx in mammary epithelial cells. Further studies are required to elucidate the proliferation-suppressing pathway used by MAGE-D1.

Multiple functions have been ascribed to BRCA2, linking it to pathways that inhibit progression to neoplasia. Heterozygous germline BRCA2 mutations predispose humans specifically to breast and ovarian cancers ( 1 - 3 ). However, BRCA2 is rarely mutated in sporadic breast and ovarian cancers ( 4 ). It is possible that distinct mechanisms targeting the BRCA2 pathways operate in sporadic cases. Recently, Hughes-Davies et al. demonstrated that EMSY, a BRCA2 interaction protein, was amplified in 13% of sporadic breast carcinomas and in 17% of sporadic ovarian carcinomas ( 42 ). These investigators suggested that overexpression of EMSY in sporadic breast and ovarian cancers may be functionally equivalent to BRCA2 mutation in familial cases ( 42 ). In this study, we found that BRCA2 can stabilize MAGE-D1 and suppress cell proliferation via MAGE-D1. MAGE-D1 acts downstream of BRCA2 and mediates the growth-suppressing function of BRCA2. Disruption of the function of MAGE-D1 by mutation, deletion, or suppression of expression should be functionally equivalent to BRCA2 mutations in disrupting BRCA2 function. Consistent with this hypothesis is our finding that, as compared MAGE-D1 expression in untransformed immortal cell lines, the expression level of MAGE-D1 was reduced in 6 of the 16 breast carcinoma cell lines we examined. This suggests that suppression of MAGE-D1 expression may be involved in the tumorigenesis of a subset of sporadic breast cancers. Biochemical and genetic analyses of MAGE-D1, a BRCA2 binding partner, would provide important insights into a pathway that is likely to be disrupted in human breast and ovarian carcinomas.
