---
pmid: '14672992'
title: Epilepsy-associated dysfunction in the voltage-gated neuronal sodium channel
  SCN1A.
authors:
- Lossin C
- Rhodes TH
- Desai RR
- Vanoye CG
- Wang D
- Carniciu S
- Devinsky O
- George AL Jr
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2003'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6740520
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-36-11289.2003
---

# Epilepsy-associated dysfunction in the voltage-gated neuronal sodium channel SCN1A.
**Authors:** Lossin C, Rhodes TH, Desai RR, Vanoye CG, Wang D, Carniciu S, Devinsky O, George AL Jr
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-36-11289.2003](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-36-11289.2003)
**PMC:** [PMC6740520](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6740520/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2003 Dec 10;23(36):11289-95. doi: 
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-36-11289.2003.

Epilepsy-associated dysfunction in the voltage-gated neuronal sodium channel 
SCN1A.

Lossin C(1), Rhodes TH, Desai RR, Vanoye CG, Wang D, Carniciu S, Devinsky O, 
George AL Jr.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Program, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0275, USA.

Mutations in SCN1A, the gene encoding the brain voltage-gated sodium channel 
alpha1 subunit (NaV1.1), are associated with at least two forms of epilepsy, 
generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) and severe myoclonic 
epilepsy of infancy (SMEI). We examined the functional properties of four GEFS+ 
alleles and one SMEI allele using whole-cell patch-clamp analysis of 
heterologously expressed recombinant human SCN1A. One previously reported GEFS+ 
mutation (I1656M) and an additional novel allele (R1657C), both affecting 
residues in a voltage-sensing S4 segment, exhibited a similar depolarizing shift 
in the voltage dependence of activation. Additionally, R1657C showed a 50% 
reduction in current density and accelerated recovery from slow inactivation. 
Unlike three other GEFS+ alleles that we recently characterized, neither R1657C 
nor I1656M gave rise to a persistent, noninactivating current. In contrast, two 
other GEFS+ mutations (A1685V and V1353L) and L986F, an SMEI-associated allele, 
exhibited complete loss of function. In conclusion, our data provide evidence 
for a wide spectrum of sodium channel dysfunction in familial epilepsy and 
demonstrate that both GEFS+ and SMEI can be associated with nonfunctional SCN1A 
alleles.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-36-11289.2003
PMCID: PMC6740520
PMID: 14672992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Mutations in SCN1A , the gene encoding the brain voltage-gated sodium channel α 1 subunit (Na V 1.1), are associated with at least two forms of epilepsy, generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) and severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (SMEI). We examined the functional properties of four GEFS+ alleles and one SMEI allele using whole-cell patch-clamp analysis of heterologously expressed recombinant human SCN1A. One previously reported GEFS+ mutation (I1656M) and an additional novel allele (R1657C), both affecting residues in a voltage-sensing S4 segment, exhibited a similar depolarizing shift in the voltage dependence of activation. Additionally, R1657C showed a 50% reduction in current density and accelerated recovery from slow inactivation. Unlike three other GEFS+ alleles that we recently characterized, neither R1657C nor I1656M gave rise to a persistent, noninactivating current. In contrast, two other GEFS+ mutations (A1685V and V1353L) and L986F, an SMEI-associated allele, exhibited complete loss of function. In conclusion, our data provide evidence for a wide spectrum of sodium channel dysfunction in familial epilepsy and demonstrate that both GEFS+ and SMEI can be associated with nonfunctional SCN1A alleles.

Introduction

Voltage-gated sodium channels are responsible for the generation and propagation of action potentials in excitable tissues. Mutations in genes encoding sodium channel pore-forming α subunits and an accessory β 1 subunit have been associated with disorders of membrane excitability, including inherited forms of epilepsy ( Ptacek, 2002 ). Two distinct clinical syndromes with overlapping features have been linked recently to mutations in the neuronal sodium channel α 1 subunit gene SCN1A , and a more complete understanding of the precise molecular and biophysical mechanisms underlying these disorders is needed.

In generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+), convulsions associated with fever continue to occur beyond the age when typical febrile seizures abate ( Scheffer and Berkovic, 1997 ). Affected individuals with GEFS+ may also experience afebrile ictal episodes of varying types, including generalized tonic-clonic, absence, myoclonic, atonic, and myoclonic-astatic seizures. Missense mutations in SCN1A predominate among the genetic defects associated with GEFS+ (Escayg et al., 2000 , 2001 ; Abou-Khalil et al., 2001 ; Sugawara et al., 2001a ; Wallace et al., 2001b ), but heritable alterations in two other sodium channel genes ( SCN1B and SCN2A ) ( Wallace et al., 1998 ; Sugawara et al., 2001b ) and a GABA receptor subunit ( GABRG2 ) ( Baulac et al., 2001 ; Wallace et al., 2001a ) have been implicated as well. In most cases, GEFS+ is considered to be a benign disorder.

In contrast, severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (SMEI), also known as Dravet syndrome (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man 607208 ), is a rare convulsive disorder characterized by febrile seizures with onset during the first year of life, followed by intractable epilepsy, impaired psychomotor development, and ataxia ( Dravet and Bureau, 1981 ; Scheffer et al., 2001 ). Seizures in this disorder are usually unresponsive to anticonvulsant drugs. Recently, several de novo heterozygous SCN1A mutations have been reported in SMEI probands including missense, nonsense, and insertion/deletion alleles (Claes et al., 2001 , 2003 ; Ohmori et al., 2002 ; Sugawara et al., 2002 ; Fujiwara et al., 2003 ; Nabbout et al., 2003 ). The observed clinical similarities between SMEI and GEFS+, including the frequent occurrence of febrile seizures and shared molecular genetic etiology, have prompted the idea that these disorders represent two extremes in clinical presentation of the same condition ( Singh et al., 2001 ).

To improve our understanding of the molecular basis of GEFS+ and SMEI specifically, and to broaden our knowledge of epileptogenesis in general, we and others have begun characterizing the biophysical properties of mutant voltage-gated sodium channels associated with these disorders (Alekov et al., 2000 , 2001 ; Spampanato et al., 2001 , 2003 ; Lossin et al., 2002 ; Cossette et al., 2003 ). Recently, we reported that three SCN1A mutations associated with GEFS+ caused similar defects in fast inactivation gating characterized by a persistent, noninactivating current during membrane depolarizations when recombinant human SCN1A was coexpressed heterologously with its accessory subunits ( Lossin et al., 2002 ). Our findings suggested that, in some cases of GEFS+, SCN1A mutations may promote a gain of function in sodium channels, leading to neuronal hyperexcitability. Whether all SCN1A mutations associated with GEFS+ exhibit the same pattern of channel dysfunction has not been determined.

We have now characterized four additional SCN1A missense mutations associated with GEFS+, including a novel allele and one missense mutation reported in an SMEI proband. Surprisingly, two of the four GEFS+ mutations, as well as the SMEI mutation, exhibited no function in heterologous cells. In contrast, the other two GEFS+ alleles were functional but had altered gating properties. Our findings suggest that a spectrum of functional sodium channel defects rather than a single biophysical mechanism contribute to the pathogenesis of inherited epilepsy.

Materials and Methods

Mutation screening. Family NY-005 is a small, three-generation pedigree with Ashkenazi Jewish heritage ascertained in the New York City area. The proband (male) developed generalized tonic-clonic seizures associated with high fever at 2 years of age. Over the subsequent 18 months, he experienced at least three additional generalized febrile convulsions generally lasting 2-5 min. In addition, he experienced episodic myoclonic jerks associated with momentary impairment of consciousness and conjugate upward eye deviation. The frequency of these episodes was variable, but fatigue, loud noise, or sudden bright light exposure were identified as possible triggering events. The proband's mother, maternal grandmother, and a maternal aunt all experienced febrile convulsions during childhood, although the age of termination of febrile seizures is unknown. This family was diagnosed with probable GEFS+.

Genomic DNA (25 ng) was screened for SCN1A mutations using PCR-single-strand conformational analysis, as described previously. Mutation R1657C was independently verified using allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridization coupled with chemiluminescent detection (Pierce, Rockford, IL). The probe sequence was 5′-ATC T GCACGCTGCT-biotin-3′ (mutant base italicized). Hybridizations and washes were performed at 47.5°C.

Mutagenesis and heterologous expression of human SCN1A. Full-length human SCN1A (Na V 1.1) cDNA was prepared and mutated as described previously ( Lossin et al., 2002 ). To reconstitute the native brain sodium channel complex, SCN1A was coexpressed heterologously with human accessory β 1 and β 2 subunits in human tsA201 cells, as described previously ( Lossin et al., 2002 ). All mutant cDNAs were fully sequenced before their use in transfection experiments. At least two different recombinant clones of each mutant cDNA were evaluated. Concentration of each plasmid DNA was determined spectrophotometrically (UV) as well as fluorometrically (PicoGreen; Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR).

Electrophysiology and data analysis. Whole-cell voltage-clamp experiments addressing fast inactivation were described previously ( Lossin et al., 2002 ). Whole-cell capacitance and access resistance were determined by integrating capacitive transients of voltage steps from -120 to -110 mV filtered at 10 kHz. Series resistance (2 ± 0.1 MΩ) was compensated 87-95% to assure that the command potential was reached within microseconds and with a voltage error <3 mV. All data were acquired at 10-50 kHz and low-pass Bessel filtered at 5 kHz. Persistent current was evaluated by 100 msec depolarizations to -10 mV in the presence and absence of 10 μ m TTX, a potent sodium channel blocker (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). Representative traces for each condition were selected to have the same initial leak current, a composite TTX-sensitive trace was generated, and the mean current of the composite trace between 80 and 100 msec was calculated as percentage of the peak current. Data of recovery and steady-state inactivation experiments were digitally adjusted for leak current by subtracting the mean inward current apparent at 15-20 msec in a -10 mV step. Recording artifacts were further avoided by selecting traces with rapid capacitive transients and a holding current at -120 mV of <5% of the peak current. The range of peak current amplitude recorded at -10 mV in this study was 0.8-11.3 nA.

Slow inactivation was examined by paired-pulse protocols in which the response to a 50 msec test pulse to -10 mV was measured before (P1) and after (P2) variable conditioning protocols. Current measured during P2 was then normalized to the maximal current measured during P1. In detail, for onset of slow inactivation, the conditioning comprised voltage steps to -10 mV lasting from 100 msec to 100 sec, followed by a 50 msec recovery from fast inactivation at -120 mV. Conditioning for steady-state slow inactivation consisted of a 30 sec step to voltages between -140 and -10 mV and a 50 msec fast inactivation recovery at -120 mV. Conditioning for recovery from slow inactivation experiments used a 30 sec pulse to -10 mV, followed by recovery periods ranging from 100 msec to 100 sec. P1 pulses were repeated before each change of condition to minimize offset from run-down. In all cases, sufficient recovery time at -120 mV was allotted between different conditions to avoid accumulation of slow inactivation (determined in preliminary experiments; data not shown). Recordings with noticeable changes in P1 amplitude during the course of the experiment were discarded. Data from onset of slow inactivation experiments were plotted versus the length of the conditioning pulse and fitted to the two-exponential decay function:

where A i describes the fraction of the channels entering slow inactivation with time constant τ i , and y 0 describes fraction of the channels that remains active. Steady-state slow inactivation data were fitted to the Boltzmann function:

where V 1/2 is the voltage at which half-maximal slow inactivation occurs, k is the slope factor of the fit, and y 0 is the fraction of the channels that remains active. Recovery from slow inactivation was fitted to the two-exponential function:

where A i refers the fraction of the channels recovering with time constant τ i . Data analysis was performed using Clampfit 8.2 (Axon Instruments, Union City, CA), Excel 2002 (Microsoft, Seattle, WA), and OriginPro 7.0 (OriginLab, Northampton, MA) software. All data were fit using a nonlinear least squares minimization method. Results are presented as means ± SE, and statistical comparisons were made between data from mutant sodium channels and wild-type (WT) SCN1A using the unpaired Student's t test. Statistical significance was assumed for p < 0.05 and deemed not significant (NS) for p ≥ 0.05. In some figures, the SE bars are smaller than the data symbols.

Single-channel current measurements were performed in the outside-out patch configuration at room temperature using the same solutions as the whole-cell experiments. Pipettes were pulled from thick-wall borosilicate glass (World Precision Instruments, Sarasota, FL) with a multistage P-97 Flaming-Brown micropipette puller (Sutter Instruments, San Rafael, CA). Fire-polished patch pipettes for single-channel studies were additionally coated with Sylgard 184 (Dow Corning, Midland, MI) and had resistance of ∼6 MΩ with standard pipette and bath solutions. Single-channel conductance was estimated by fitting the single-channel amplitude-voltage relationships in the range -30 to +10 mV by linear regression.

Rescue experiments. To test for rescue of trafficking-defective mutants, tsA201 cells were transfected with L986F plasmid DNA and both β subunits at 37°C, as described above. Immediately after the transfection, the medium was replaced with drug-supplemented media or the cells were transferred to a low temperature (26°C) incubator. The cells were washed three times with prewarmed DMEM and incubated in drug-free media for another 1.5 hr at 37°C before data acquisition. Low temperature rescue only was analogously attempted for V1353L and A1685V.

Discussion

The identification of human ion channel mutations in epilepsy has provided new opportunities to investigate the molecular basis of this complex and heterogeneous neurological condition ( Meisler et al., 2001 ). We have focused our efforts on defining the biophysical defects associated with mutations in the human neuronal voltage-gated sodium channel gene SCN1A . Mutations in this gene are associated with GEFS+, often transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait, and SMEI (Dravet syndrome), a more severe disorder with an unclear inheritance pattern ( Dravet and Bureau, 1981 ; Scheffer et al., 2001 ). In some families, both disorders may be present, suggesting that GEFS+ and SMEI represent a clinical spectrum of the same disease ( Singh et al., 2001 ). More than one hundred SCN1A mutations have been defined to date, with missense mutations being most common in GEFS+ (Escayg et al., 2000 , 2001 ; Abou-Khalil et al., 2001 ; Sugawara et al., 2001a ; Wallace et al., 2001b ; Ito et al., 2002 ) and more deleterious alleles (nonsense, frameshift) representing the majority of SMEI mutations ( Claes et al., 2001 ; Sugawara et al., 2001a ; Ohmori et al., 2002 ; Fujiwara et al., 2003 ; Nabbout et al., 2003 ). Given this mutational diversity, it is logical to assume that a range of functional defects account for the varied clinical presentation of these disorders.
