---
pmid: '10465784'
title: ECSIT is an evolutionarily conserved intermediate in the Toll/IL-1 signal transduction
  pathway.
authors:
- Kopp E
- Medzhitov R
- Carothers J
- Xiao C
- Douglas I
- Janeway CA
- Ghosh S
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1999'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC316957
doi: 10.1101/gad.13.16.2059
---

# ECSIT is an evolutionarily conserved intermediate in the Toll/IL-1 signal transduction pathway.
**Authors:** Kopp E, Medzhitov R, Carothers J, Xiao C, Douglas I, Janeway CA, Ghosh S
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.13.16.2059](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.13.16.2059)
**PMC:** [PMC316957](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC316957/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1999 Aug 15;13(16):2059-71. doi: 10.1101/gad.13.16.2059.

ECSIT is an evolutionarily conserved intermediate in the Toll/IL-1 signal 
transduction pathway.

Kopp E(1), Medzhitov R, Carothers J, Xiao C, Douglas I, Janeway CA, Ghosh S.

Author information:
(1)Section of Immunobiology and Department of Molecular Biophysics and 
Biochemistry, Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI), Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520 USA.

Activation of NF-kappaB as a consequence of signaling through the Toll and IL-1 
receptors is a major element of innate immune responses. We report the 
identification and characterization of a novel intermediate in these signaling 
pathways that bridges TRAF6 to MEKK-1. This adapter protein, which we have named 
ECSIT (evolutionarily conserved signaling intermediate in Toll pathways), is 
specific for the Toll/IL-1 pathways and is a regulator of MEKK-1 processing. 
Expression of wild-type ECSIT accelerates processing of MEKK-1, whereas a 
dominant-negative fragment of ECSIT blocks MEKK-1 processing and activation of 
NF-kappaB. These results indicate an important role for ECSIT in signaling to 
NF-kappaB and suggest that processing of MEKK-1 is required for its function in 
the Toll/IL-1 pathway.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.13.16.2059
PMCID: PMC316957
PMID: 10465784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Activation of NF-κB as a consequence of signaling through the Toll and IL-1 receptors is a major element of innate immune responses. We report the identification and characterization of a novel intermediate in these signaling pathways that bridges TRAF6 to MEKK-1. This adapter protein, which we have named ECSIT ( e volutionarily c onserved s ignaling i ntermediate in T oll pathways), is specific for the Toll/IL-1 pathways and is a regulator of MEKK-1 processing. Expression of wild-type ECSIT accelerates processing of MEKK-1, whereas a dominant-negative fragment of ECSIT blocks MEKK-1 processing and activation of NF-κB. These results indicate an important role for ECSIT in signaling to NF-κB and suggest that processing of MEKK-1 is required for its function in the Toll/IL-1 pathway.

Discussion

We report the identification and characterization of ECSIT, a novel intermediate in Toll/IL-1 signal transduction pathway. ECSIT interacts specifically with TRAF6 and MEKK-1 and appears to function in this pathway by facilitating the processing of MEKK-1. ECSIT represents a novel signaling intermediate that not only interacts with multiple components in the pathway but also induces the modification of one of the components, namely MEKK-1. We have also identified and cloned ECSIT from Drosophila and have demonstrated that it performs a similar function in Drosphila cells. Therefore, ECSIT is an evolutionarily conserved signaling adapter protein in the Toll/IL-1 pathway.

The Toll/IL-1 and the TNF receptor signaling pathways have many similarities. Each leads to the activation of the transcription factors NF-κB and, in some cell types, AP-1 (Fig. 9 ). The overall organization of these pathways is remarkably similar, alternating between adapter proteins and kinases. Despite these similarities, there are important differences. Although both pathways use TRAF adapters and a serine/threonine kinase of the serine/threonine innate immunity kinase (SIIK) type, the specific components in each pathway appear to be distinct. The TNF receptor pathway uses TRAF2, TRAF5, and the RIP kinase, whereas the Toll/IL-1 receptor pathway uses TRAF6 and IRAK ( Cao et al. 1996a , b ; Muzio et al. 1997 ; Wesche et al. 1997 ). Furthermore, whereas TRAF2 interacts with the TNF receptor complex ( Rothe et al. 1994 ; Takeuchi et al. 1996 ), TRAF6 interacts with IRAK after IL-1 treatment but does not coimmunoprecipitate with the IL-1 receptor complex ( Cao et al. 1996b ). Unlike the Toll receptor signaling pathway, the TNF receptor pathway has so far not been identified in Drosophila and therefore may have developed after the divergence of vertebrates and invertebrates. ECSIT on the other hand is conserved in Drosophila as dECSIT and specifically binds TRAF6 or dTRAF6 in both vertebrate and invertebrate systems, respectively.

TRAF6 activates both NF-κB and AP-1 when overexpressed in cells. A necessary upstream event in the activation of these transcription factors is phosphorylation of specific substrates: JNK, in the case of AP-1, and IKKs in the case of NF-κB. Two MAPKKK family members have been shown to interact directly with all of the TRAFs: ASK-1 and NIK. However, neither of these kinases is capable of activating both AP-1 and NF-κB, thus leading to the proposal that the signal transduction pathways bifurcate downstream of the TRAFs. MEKK-1 on the other hand is an attractive candidate for a kinase that bridges the TRAFs to both of these downstream targets, even though MEKK-1 does not appear to interact directly with any of the TRAFs ( Natoli et al. 1997 ). In support of a role for MEKK-1, we have found that TRAF6-induced signaling is inhibited by transfection of very low amounts of dominant-negative MEKK-1 constructs (data not shown). Instead, as our studies show, TRAF6 interacts directly with ECSIT and provides a link to MEKK-1. Because ECSIT appears to bind only TRAF6 and not TRAF2 or TRAF5, MEKK-1 may only participate in TRAF6 signaling. Alternatively, there may be other proteins like ECSIT, which link the other TRAFs to MEKK-1. It is important to note that recently a pair of proteins, TAB/TAK, has been suggested to lie downstream of TRAF6 and allows activation of both NF-κB and AP-1, a pathway that appears distinct from the ECSIT/MEKK-1 pathway described here ( Ninomiya-Tsuji et al. 1999 ). It is possible that ECSIT functions similarly to TAB, by acting as an adapter for a downstream MAP3K, which is MEKK-1 for ECSIT and TAK for TAB. The involvement of MEKK-1 in TRAF6 signaling may be determined by the nature of the signal (e.g., Toll signaling vs. CD40 signaling) and does not exclude the possibility that TRAF6 also signals to NF-κB and AP-1 via NIK and ASK-1, respectively.

Although a number of previous studies have implicated MEKK-1 in the activation of NF-κB, its exact role has remained somewhat controversial. MEKK-1 was shown to activate a large multiprotein IκB kinase activity in vitro that could then specifically phosphorylate the NF-κB inhibitor IκBα at the appropriate amino-terminal serine residues ( Lee et al. 1997 ). It was subsequently demonstrated that MEKK-1 could also activate the IκB kinases IKKα and IKKβ in cells ( Lee et al. 1998 ; Nakano et al. 1998 ) and that the MEKK-1-inducible kinase activity described above contained IKKα ( Lee et al. 1998 ). The activation of NF-κB by the HTLV-1 transactivating protein, Tax, was also shown to involve MEKK-1: It operates by binding to MEKK-1 and stimulating MEKK-1 kinase activity. In addition, a fragment of MEKK-1 copurified in a high-molecular-weight complex containing the functional IKKs ( Mercurio et al. 1997 ), suggesting that MEKK-1 may be a component of IKK complex. Our studies implicating MEKK-1 as a target of ECSIT therefore further strengthen the concept that MEKK-1 plays an important role in signaling to NF-κB.

Expression of ECSIT enhances the processing of MEKK-1 into its smaller 80-kD form, and expression of the carboxy-terminal region of ECSIT appears to interfere with this process by binding MEKK-1. An earlier study had suggested that processing of MEKK-1 was only required for the proapoptotic function of MEKK-1 and not for activation of NF-κB or AP-1. However, we have observed a strong correlation between inhibition of the processing of MEKK-1 and inhibition of NF-κB and AP-1. Because the earlier study did not directly examine the role of MEKK-1 in TRAF6-regulated pathways, it is possible that processing of MEKK-1 is associated with NF-κB and AP-1 activation in certain pathways but not others. It is also possible that specific cells used in different studies might be important for the observed differences. It will also be important to fully characterize the mechanism responsible for processing of MEKK-1. Endogenous MEKK-1 is primarily a membrane-associated protein, and hence, processing of MEKK-1 might relocate the kinase domain, thus allowing it to phosphorylate appropriate substrates. Our finding that ECSIT enhances the processing suggests that it might help to recruit a protease (e.g., a caspase) that then cleaves MEKK-1. However, besides its role in facilitating processing of MEKK-1, ECSIT also appears to be important in providing a bridge between TRAF6 and downstream signaling kinases. The mechanism by which TRAFs function in general is unclear, but it is known that they can form oligomers of themselves through the TRAF domain and therefore may assemble higher order functional complexes with other proteins ( Arch et al. 1998 ). Hence, oligomerization of TRAF6 may allow it to recruit additional proteins and link them to MEKK-1 via ECSIT. Alternatively, TRAF6 oligomerization may simply bring MEKK-1 molecules into proximity with other MEKK-1 molecules, allowing cross-phosphorylation, thereby increasing kinase activity.

The mammalian Toll proteins function in innate immune responses. TLR2 and TLR4 have recently been shown to be essential for signal transduction in the cellular response to the bacterial cell-wall component, LPS ( Du et al. 1998 ; Kirschning et al. 1998 ; Poltorak et al. 1998 ; Yang et al. 1998 ; Qureshi et al. 1999 ). The innate immune response is conserved in Drosophila where it is responsible for detecting infection and for the subsequent production of antimicrobial peptides to combat it. Genetic studies in Drosophila have revealed that the Rel (or NF-κB) family of transcription factors controls the inducible transcription of many antifungal and antibacterial peptides ( Hoffmann et al. 1996 ). The Toll family of receptors activates these Rel proteins through the sequential activation of cytoplasmic signaling molecules ( Kopp and Medzhitov 1999 ). It is therefore not surprising that the ECSIT homolog in Drosophila (dECSIT) appears to have a role in innate immune function. Recently, two groups of genes, termed immune response deficient (ird), in Drosophila were described that impair either nuclear localization or transcriptional ability of Rel proteins, Dorsal and Dif, suggesting the existence of other, uncharacterized proteins in this pathway ( Wu and Anderson 1998 ). Although still unidentified, these mutants may represent Drosophila homologs of other known members of the vertebrate Toll signaling pathway. The recent identification of a Drosophila homolog of TRAF6 supports this concept ( Liu et al. 1999 ). It will be interesting to determine whether one of the ird mutations is in the dECSIT gene.
