---
pmid: '9891070'
title: Control of Saccharomyces cerevisiae filamentous growth by cyclin-dependent
  kinase Cdc28.
authors:
- Edgington NP
- Blacketer MJ
- Bierwagen TA
- Myers AM
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC116065
doi: 10.1128/MCB.19.2.1369
---

# Control of Saccharomyces cerevisiae filamentous growth by cyclin-dependent kinase Cdc28.
**Authors:** Edgington NP, Blacketer MJ, Bierwagen TA, Myers AM
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.19.2.1369](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.19.2.1369)
**PMC:** [PMC116065](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC116065/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Feb;19(2):1369-80. doi: 10.1128/MCB.19.2.1369.

Control of Saccharomyces cerevisiae filamentous growth by cyclin-dependent 
kinase Cdc28.

Edgington NP(1), Blacketer MJ, Bierwagen TA, Myers AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 
50011, USA.

The ascomycete Saccharomyces cerevisiae exhibits alternative vegetative growth 
states referred to as the yeast form and the filamentous form, and it switches 
between the two morphologies depending on specific environmental signals. To 
identify molecules involved in control of morphologic differentiation, this 
study characterized mutant S. cerevisiae strains that exhibit filamentous growth 
in the absence of the normal external signals. A specific amino acid 
substitution in the cyclin-dependent protein kinase Cdc28 was found to cause 
constitutive expression of most filamentous growth characteristics. These 
effects include specifically modified cell polarity characteristics in addition 
to the defined shape and division cycle alterations typical of the filamentous 
form. Several other mutations affecting Cdc28 function also had specific effects 
on filamentous growth. Constitutive filamentous growth resulting from deletion 
of the protein kinase Elm1 was prevented by modification of Cdc28 such that it 
could not be phosphorylated on tyrosine residue 19. In addition, various 
mutations affecting Hsl1 or Swe1, known or presumed components of a protein 
kinase cascade that mediates Cdc28 phosphorylation on Y19, either prevented or 
enhanced filamentous growth. The data suggest that a protein kinase cascade 
involving Elm1, Hsl1, and Swe1 can modulate Cdc28 activity and that Cdc28 in 
turn exerts global effects that cause filamentous growth.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.19.2.1369
PMCID: PMC116065
PMID: 9891070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The ascomycete Saccharomyces cerevisiae exhibits alternative vegetative growth states referred to as the yeast form and the filamentous form, and it switches between the two morphologies depending on specific environmental signals. To identify molecules involved in control of morphologic differentiation, this study characterized mutant S. cerevisiae strains that exhibit filamentous growth in the absence of the normal external signals. A specific amino acid substitution in the cyclin-dependent protein kinase Cdc28 was found to cause constitutive expression of most filamentous growth characteristics. These effects include specifically modified cell polarity characteristics in addition to the defined shape and division cycle alterations typical of the filamentous form. Several other mutations affecting Cdc28 function also had specific effects on filamentous growth. Constitutive filamentous growth resulting from deletion of the protein kinase Elm1 was prevented by modification of Cdc28 such that it could not be phosphorylated on tyrosine residue 19. In addition, various mutations affecting Hsl1 or Swe1, known or presumed components of a protein kinase cascade that mediates Cdc28 phosphorylation on Y19, either prevented or enhanced filamentous growth. The data suggest that a protein kinase cascade involving Elm1, Hsl1, and Swe1 can modulate Cdc28 activity and that Cdc28 in turn exerts global effects that cause filamentous growth.
