---
pmid: '11790307'
title: Hus1 acts upstream of chk1 in a mammalian DNA damage response pathway.
authors:
- Weiss RS
- Matsuoka S
- Elledge SJ
- Leder P
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC11158719
doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00626-1
---

# Hus1 acts upstream of chk1 in a mammalian DNA damage response pathway.
**Authors:** Weiss RS, Matsuoka S, Elledge SJ, Leder P
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00626-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00626-1)
**PMC:** [PMC11158719](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11158719/)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2002 Jan 8;12(1):73-7. doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00626-1.

Hus1 acts upstream of chk1 in a mammalian DNA damage response pathway.

Weiss RS(1), Matsuoka S, Elledge SJ, Leder P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The evolutionarily conserved Hus1 proteins function in DNA damage response 
pathways that serve to maintain genomic stability. Cells lacking mouse Hus1 are 
hypersensitive to certain genotoxins, and we have explored the molecular basis 
for this defect by examining how Hus1 inactivation affects genotoxin-induced 
signaling events. p53 accumulation and activation in response to DNA damage 
appeared normal in Hus1 null cells. Likewise, Hus1 was dispensable for 
genotoxin-induced Chk2 phosphorylation. In contrast, Chk1 phosphorylation after 
genotoxic stress was greatly reduced in the absence of Hus1, but was restored in 
Hus1 null fibroblasts complemented by infection with a Hus1-expressing 
retrovirus. These results demonstrate that mouse Hus1 is required for a specific 
subset of DNA damage signaling events and functions to promote genotoxin-induced 
Chk1 phosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00626-1
PMID: 11790307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Cells continuously encounter DNA damage caused either by damaging agents, including oxygen radicals and DNA replication errors caused by stalled replication forks, or by extracellular environments such as ultraviolet or ionizing irradiation. Such DNA damage poses a great threat to genome stability, potentially leading to loss or amplification of chromosome activity, which may result in cellular senescence, cancer or apoptosis. The DNA damage checkpoints coordinate an arrest in cell cycle progression with the DNA repair process, suppressing either mitotic catastrophe or proliferation of cells with damaged DNA. Numerous key players have been identified in terms of damage sensor proteins, transducer kinases and effectors, but their coordination and interconnectedness in damage control have only recently become evident. In this review, we discuss changes in chromatin structure, recruitment of mediator proteins and activation of transducer kinases in response to DNA damage. These cellular responses are important for determining the potential effects of current cancer therapies in terms of toxicity and efficacy. ( Cancer Sci 2006; 97: 984–989)
