---
pmid: '33401017'
title: Elastase inhibitor agaphelin protects from acute ischemic stroke in mice by
  reducing thrombosis, blood-brain barrier damage, and inflammation.
authors:
- Leinweber J
- Mizurini DM
- Francischetti IMB
- Fleischer M
- Hermann DM
- Kleinschnitz C
- Langhauser F
journal: Brain Behav Immun
year: '2021'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC7979502
doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2020.12.027
---

# Elastase inhibitor agaphelin protects from acute ischemic stroke in mice by reducing thrombosis, blood-brain barrier damage, and inflammation.
**Authors:** Leinweber J, Mizurini DM, Francischetti IMB, Fleischer M, Hermann DM, Kleinschnitz C, Langhauser F
**Journal:** Brain Behav Immun (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbi.2020.12.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2020.12.027)
**PMC:** [PMC7979502](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7979502/)

## Abstract

1. Brain Behav Immun. 2021 Mar;93:288-298. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2020.12.027. Epub 
2021 Jan 2.

Elastase inhibitor agaphelin protects from acute ischemic stroke in mice by 
reducing thrombosis, blood-brain barrier damage, and inflammation.

Leinweber J(1), Mizurini DM(2), Francischetti IMB(3), Fleischer M(4), Hermann 
DM(4), Kleinschnitz C(4), Langhauser F(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology of University Hospital Würzburg, 
Josef-Schneider-Straße 2, 97080 Würzburg, Germany.
(2)Institute of Medical Biochemistry Leopoldo de Meis, Federal University of Rio 
de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA; 
Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
MD, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology of University Hospital Essen, Hufelandstraße 55, 
45147 Essen, Germany.
(5)Department of Neurology of University Hospital Essen, Hufelandstraße 55, 
45147 Essen, Germany. Electronic address: Friederike.Langhauser@uk-essen.de.

Recently it was shown that the hematophagous salivary gland protein agaphelin 
exhibits multiple antithrombotic effects without promoting the risk of bleeding. 
Agaphelin inhibits neutrophil elastase and thereby reduces cathepsin G-induced 
platelet aggregation. However, it is still unclear, whether pharmacological 
treatment with agaphelin in brain ischemia is protective and, regarding its 
bleeding risk, safe. To elucidate this issue, male C57BL/6 mice were subjected 
to 60 min of transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) and treated with 
0.25 mg/kg agaphelin intravenously immediately after tMCAO. On day 1 and 7, 
infarct volume and functional neurological outcome were assessed by behavioural 
tests, histochemistry and magnetic resonance imaging. Thrombus formation, 
intracerebral bleeding risk, blood-brain barrier damage and the local 
inflammatory response were determined on day 1. This study shows for the first 
time a protective effect of agaphelin characterized by smaller infarct volume, 
reduced neurological deficits and reduced animal mortality. This protective 
effect was associated with reduced local thrombus formation, increased 
blood-brain barrier integrity and reduced brain inflammatory response. It is 
essential to mention that the protective effect of agaphelin was not linked to 
an increased risk of intracerebral bleeding. The promotion of brain tissue 
survival and inhibition of thromboinflammation identifies agaphelin as a 
promising treatment option in ischemic stroke, which considering the lack of 
bleeding risk should potentially be safe.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2020.12.027
PMCID: PMC7979502
PMID: 33401017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of interest: The authors declare 
that they have no competing financial interests or personal relationships that 
could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Full Text

Abstract

Recently it was shown that the hematophagous salivary gland protein agaphelin exhibits multiple antithrombotic effects without promoting the risk of bleeding. Agaphelin inhibits neutrophil elastase and thereby reduces cathepsin G-induced platelet aggregation. However, it is still unclear, whether pharmacological treatment with agaphelin in brain ischemia is protective and, regarding its bleeding risk, safe. To elucidate this issue, male C57Bl/6 mice were subjected to 60 minutes of transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) and treated with 0.25 mg/kg agaphelin intravenously immediately after tMCAO. On day 1 and 7, infarct volume and functional neurological outcome were assessed by behavioural tests, histochemistry and magnetic resonance imaging. Thrombus formation, intracerebral bleeding risk, blood-brain barrier damage and the local inflammatory response were determined on day 1. This study shows for the first time a protective effect of agaphelin characterized by smaller infarct volume, reduced neurological deficits and reduced animal mortality. This protective effect was associated with reduced local thrombus formation, increased blood-brain barrier integrity and reduced brain inflammatory response. It is essential to mention that the protective effect of agaphelin was not linked to an increased risk of intracerebral bleeding. The promotion of brain tissue survival and inhibition of thromboinflammation identifies agaphelin as a promising treatment option in ischemic stroke, which considering the lack of bleeding risk should potentially be safe.

1. Introduction

An essential process in the complex pathophysiology of ischemic stroke is progressive thrombus formation, resulting in the occlusion of cerebral microvessels. Recanalization of occluded vessels, which re-establishes brain oxygen and nutrient supply, is a primary therapeutic goal that limits ischemic brain injury ( De Meyer et al., 2016 ). So far, thrombolysis using recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator is the only proven pharmacological intervention in ischemic stroke. Thrombolysis is frequently combined with endovascular thrombectomy, which reopens larger brain arteries. Nevertheless, despite successful recanalization of large arteries, persistent ischemic brain damage and neurological deficits evolve in most strokes ( Coutts and Goyal, 2009 ) as a consequence of microvascular thrombosis and inflammation resulting in the lack of microvascular reopening. There is increasing evidence that microvascular thrombosis and inflammation are linked, which has led to the concept of thromboinflammation ( De Meyer et al., 2016 ). During a thrombotic event, adhered blood platelets get activated and increase the risk of subsequent thrombotic events ( Stoll et al., 2008 ).

The associated inflammatory response leads to upregulation of cell adhesion molecules on endothelial cells, release of cytokines and trafficking of several inflammatory cells (e.g. neutrophils, macrophages, T cells) into the brain parenchyma, causing secondary tissue damage ( Stoll et al., 2010 ). Due to the limited treatment strategies in stroke management, specifically regarding microvascular reopening, the development of new therapeutic approaches for ischemic stroke targeting thromboinflammation is particularly important ( Nieswandt et al., 2011 , De Meyer et al., 2016 ).

Recent studies have shown that the hematophagous ( Ribeiro and Francischetti, 2003 ) salivary gland protein agaphelin, originally isolated from salivary glands of anopheles gambiae, exhibits multiple antithrombotic effects without promoting bleeding risk ( Waisberg et al., 2014 ). Agaphelin, a Kazal-type protease inhibitor, is a 54 amino acid long peptide with a molecular weight of 6.27 kDa. Waisberg et al. (2014) demonstrated an effective antihemostatic effect of agaphelin in a model of FeCl 3 -induced arterial thrombus formation in carotid arteries of mice while there was neither evidence for a prolonged bleeding time evaluated by the tail bleeding assay in vivo, nor an increased partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) or prothrombin time (PT) in vitro. Furthermore, reduced neutrophil chemotaxis was shown in a carrageenan-induced inflammatory paw edema model in mice, indicating anti-inflammation induced by agaphelin ( Waisberg et al., 2014 ). Only recently, agaphelin was identified to reduce airway inflammation by modulation of the activity of human bronchial epithelial cells ( Favarin et al., 2020 ). In this in vitro study agaphelin reduced the interleukin-4 (IL-4) or lipolysaccharide (LPS) induced production of CC-chemokine ligand-2 (CCL-2) and IL-8.

The antihemostatic and anti-inflammatory effects of agaphelin in vitro and in vivo were attributed to its inhibition of the catalytic activity of neutrophil elastase (NE) ( Waisberg et al., 2014 ).

NE contributes to the reduction of cathepsin G-induced platelet aggregation, cleavage of tissue factor protease inhibitor (TFPI), degradation of matrixmetalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), attenuated neutrophil chemotaxis and diminished release of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs). NETs are involved in the initiation of intrinsic coagulation and the kallikrein-kinin system by activating FXII ( Fuchs et al., 2007 ). Hence, inhibition of elastase is potentially associated with the blockade of several relevant pathways contributing to thrombosis and neutrophil-mediated inflammation ( Pham, 2006 ; Waisberg et al., 2014 ). Previous studies showed reduced infarct volume and improved neurological function in response to NE −/− and pharmacological NE inhibition in a model of transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) in mice ( Ikegame et al., 2010 ; Stowe et al., 2009 ). To further elucidate the contribution of NE-associated thrombosis and thromboinflammation to ischemic brain injury, we examined the effect of agaphelin on infarct volume, functional neurological deficits, animal survival, thrombus formation and neuroinflammation in a mouse tMCAO model.

3.1. Agaphelin provides long term neuroprotection resulting in smaller infarct volumes and improved neurological functions accompanied by reduced mortality

TMCAO for 1 hour induces a fast and strong inflammatory response associated with progressive microvascular thrombosis and brain edema ( Braeuninger and Kleinschnitz, 2009 ). 6–8 week old male C57BL / 6N mice were subjected to 1 hour of tMCAO and then treated with 0.25 mg/kg body weight agaphelin or, as a control, vehicle at reperfusion onset. Infarct volume on day 1 after tMCAO, assessed by TTC staining, was significantly smaller by 58.8 % in agaphelin-treated mice compared to vehicle-treated mice (mean 102.30 ± 8.28 mm 3 vs 45.71 ± 9.48 mm 3 , P <0.001, N=10–12 per group; Fig. 1A , B ). To evaluate the neurological outcome, a highly relevant endpoint, functional scores were applied. Compared with the vehicle group, mice treated with agaphelin showed significantly reduced neurological deficits in the Bederson score (median 3.0 [2.25, 3.0] for vehicle vs 2.0 [2.0, 3.0] for agaphelin P <0.05, N=12 per group; Fig. 1C ) and improved motor-coordination in the grip test (median 3.0 [2.25, 3.0] for vehicle vs 4.0 [3.0, 4.25] for agaphelin P <0.01, N=12 per group; Fig. 1D ) at 24 hours post tMCAO.

In order to investigate the dynamics of stroke development, MRI was performed. The edema-corrected infarct volume, assessed by T2-weighted spin echo sequences in MRI, were significantly smaller on day 1 after tMCAO in animals receiving agaphelin compared to animals receiving vehicle (80.61 ± 5.56 mm 3 for vehicle vs 55.88 ± 6.33 mm 3 for agaphelin, P <0.01, N=9–10 per group; Fig. 1E , F ), as was edema volume (35.66 mm 3 ± 4.23 mm 3 for vehicle-treated mice compared to 22.76 mm 3 ± 2.49 mm 3 in agaphelin-treated mice; P <0.05; N=9–10; Fig 1E , G ). Importantly, these smaller of infarct volumes persisted on day 7, (60.85 ± 3.41 mm 3 for vehicle-treated mice vs 37.56 ± 6.57 mm 3 for agaphelin-treated mice, P >0.05; N = 4–8 per group; Fig. 1F ), indicative of long-term neuroprotection. The slightly smaller infarct volume at 7 compared to 1 day post tMCAO may partly be attributed to a selection bias resulting from the loss of severely affected mice with large infarcts between days 1 and 7 post-tMCAO. To detect intracerebral hemorrhage, a blood-sensitive coronal T2-weighted gradient echo sequence was used. Intracerebral bleeding, which would typically appear as hypointense (dark) areas, were consequently absent in animals treated with agaphelin ( Figure 1H ).

Furthermore, the survival rate of agaphelin treated mice and vehicle treated over a 7 day period after ischemic stroke was determined. In vehicle-treated mice 6 of 12 mice (50%) died in the first 4 days post tMCAO and only 4 animals (33.3%) survived until day 7, which is in line with previous reports in this model of severe focal cerebral ischemia ( Kleinschnitz et al., 2010 ). Of the mice treated with agaphelin, 9 out of 10 mice (90%) were still alive on day 4 and 8 mice (80%) on day 7 (P = 0.0075) ( Fig. 1I ). These results indicate that treatment with agaphelin leads to smaller infarct sizes, reduced neurological deficits and improves animal survival.

4. Discussion

This study shows a protective effect of agaphelin in a mouse model of ischemic stroke. Treatment of mice with agaphelin immediately after tMCAO resulted in smaller infarct volume and reduced neurological deficits on day 1 after stroke. Animal mortality was reduced over up to 7 days post stroke. This protective effect was due to reduced local thrombus formation, reduced neuroinflammation, reduced blood-brain barrier damage and reduced caspase-3-dependent apoptosis. Moreover, it is important to mention that the neuroprotective effect of agaphelin was not linked to an increased risk of intracerebral bleeding.

Agaphelin was shown to exhibit antithrombotic effects without affecting hemostasis ( Waisberg et al., 2014 ). This effect was found to be mediated by the inhibition of NE ( Waisberg et al., 2014 ). Previous studies already showed a reduction of infarct size and reduced neurological deficits in NE −/− mice and mice receiving the NE inhibitors ZN200355101 and Sivelestat49 exposed to tMCAO ( Ikegame et al., 2010 ; Stowe et al., 2009 ). Even though infarct volumes in NE −/− were reduced in tMCAO, there was no such effect after permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion ( Ikegame et al., 2010 ). The loss of neuroprotection in permanent MCAO might indicate a substantial role of NE in post-ischemic reperfusion injury. According to the present data, agaphelin efficiently reduces reperfusion injury.

To investigate the underlying mechanisms for the shown protective effect of agaphelin, we first looked for microvascular thrombosis following ischemic stroke. The observation of an antithrombotic effect by agaphelin in an in vivo model of ischemic stroke which could be ascribed to decreased thrombus formation is in line with previous findings in the in vivo model of arterial thrombus formation in mice, where agaphelin completely inhibited FeCl 3 -induced vascular occlusion ( Waisberg et al., 2014 ). The underlying mechanisms for its antithrombotic effects in cerebral ischemia still have to be elucidated. So far, in vitro experiments showed agaphelin-induced NE inhibition reduced thrombus formation ( Waisberg et al., 2014 ). NE contributes to platelet aggregation and coagulation through various mechanisms, for example NET formation ( Fuchs et al., 2010 ; Martinod and Wagner, 2014 ; von Bruhl et al., 2012 ) and cathepsin G-induced platelet aggregation ( Si-Tahar et al., 1997 ). Indeed, agaphelin inhibited platelet aggregation in vitro ( Waisberg et al., 2014 ). The combined evidence of the here presented findings and of previous studies suggests that inhibition of NE and NE-dependent NET formation are involved in the antithrombotic effect of agaphelin.

Important from a translational perspective, the agaphelin-induced inhibition of thrombus formation was not associated with an increased intracerebral bleeding risk after tMCAO. In fact, no prolongation of aPTT and PT in vitro and no prolongation of tail bleeding time in vivo had been reported in response to agaphelin in the past ( Waisberg et al., 2014 ). Indeed, the risk of stroke-related hemorrhage was not increased in mice treated with agaphelin. These results suggest that hemostasis was not comprised.

Another consequence of persisting ischemia is structural destabilization of the blood-brain barrier leading to inflammatory processes, leukocyte infiltration and the formation of brain edema, which is known to be a frequent cause of secondary infarct growth and deterioration of neurological symptoms ( Ayata and Ropper, 2002 ; Weiss et al., 2009 ). Degradation of tight junctions and extracellular matrix by neutrophil-derived proteases such as MMP-9, NE and proteinase-3 significantly contribute to blood-brain barrier damage ( Allen et al., 2012 ; Fagan et al., 2004 ; Rosell et al., 2008 ). There is also evidence that NE activates MMP-9 ( Garratt et al., 2015 ). Based on the observations, we examined the effect of agaphelin on blood-brain barrier integrity. After treatment with agaphelin, blood-brain barrier integrity was highly maintained, an effect that could be ascribed to reduced MMP-9 levels. As a consequence, mice treated with agaphelin developed significantly less brain edema that is known to be a frequent cause of secondary infarct growth and deterioration of neurological symptoms. NE −/− and pharmacological NE inhibition similarly increased post-ischemic blood-brain barrier integrity in the past ( Ikegame et al., 2010 ; Stowe et al., 2009 ).

Due to previous findings that agaphelin inhibits neutrophil chemotaxis in vitro ( Waisberg et al., 2014 ), this study characterized cerebral microvascular thrombus formation and leukocyte infiltration by immunohistochemistry. In line with the concept of thrombo-inflammation ( Nieswandt et al., 2011 ), agaphelin significantly decreased microvascular thrombus formation, neutrophil and monocyte/macrophage infiltration on day 1. Neutrophils are among the first cells to invade parenchyma and play acausative role in infarct development by producing free radicals and release of MMP-9, neutrophil elastase and other proteases ( Magnus et al., 2012 , Neumann et al., 2015 ). A reduced neutrophil infiltration was also shown before after NE inhibition in in vivo models of ischemia- reperfusion damage ( Carden and Korthuis, 1996 ), endotoxin-induced acute lung injury ( Kawabata et al., 2000 ) and collagen-induced arthritis ( Kakimoto et al., 1995 ). Besides, NE was evaluated as a prognostic parameter of inflammation in ischemic stroke ( Cojocaru et al., 2006 ).

Recently agaphelin was identified as a potential anti-inflammatory therapeutic agent in a model of airway inflammation, by showing its modulating effects of the activation of bronchial epithelial cells ( Favarin et al., 2020 ), but the underlying pathways are still unclear. Hence, we analyzed activation of signalling pathways involved in post-ischemic neuroinflammation. Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signalling pathways, involving p38 MAPK, have been implicated in the regulation of cytokine expression and cell apoptosis after stroke ( Gladbach et al. 2014 , Huang et al., 2013 ). Nito et al. (2008) found that the p38 MAPK/cPLA2 pathway promoted blood–brain barrier disruption resulting in secondary vasogenic edema. NF‐κB serves as a significant nuclear transcription factor and regulates the genes of multiple cytokines, such as IL‐1, IL‐6 and TNF‐α, all of which greatly impact ischemic brain damage ( Liu et al., 2015 ). Down-regulation of NF‐κB activity exerts neuroprotective effects in ischemic stroke ( Ji et al., 2012 ; Qiao et al., 2012 ). Indeed, we saw a significant decrease of nuclear protein NF- κ B and phospho-p38 MAPK, accompanied by reduced levels of IL-6 after agaphelin treatment. Both pathways are involved in caspase-3-dependent apoptosis ( Gladbach et al. 2014 ). Indeed, we found a reduced activation of caspase-9 and −3, accompanied with a reduced number of DNA-fragmented cells in the ischemic brain after agaphelin treatment. Taken together, these results show a strong anti-inflammatory and anti-apoptotic effect of agaphelin and this may occur through downregulating of phospho-p38MAPK and NF- κ B.

In conclusion, treatment with agaphelin ameliorates ischemic brain damage by combined anti-thrombotic, anti-inflammatory and anti-apoptotic mechanisms. Importantly, neuroprotection by treatment with agaphelin did not increase intracerebral bleeding after ischemic stroke. Hence, agaphelin appears to be a promising candidate for ischemic stroke treatment, but further translational studies, including also comorbid or older mice and permanent MCAO, are needed to fully understand the efficacy and safety of agaphelin before testing agaphelin in clinical stroke trials. One important question that still has to be addressed is the effect of agaphelin in animals undergoing r-tPA-induced thrombolysis. Exogenous administration of r-tPA enhances the effect of MMP9 aggravating blood-brain barrier damage. Considering that agaphelin might also have a blood-brain barrier stabilizing effect after r-tPA-induced thrombolysis by reducing MMP-9 activity, this NE inhibitor might specifically be efficacious when combined with thrombolytic therapy.
