---
pmid: '9608530'
title: Sympathetic neuron survival and proliferation are prolonged by loss of p53
  and neurofibromin.
authors:
- Vogel KS
- Parada LF
journal: Mol Cell Neurosci
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/mcne.1998.0670
---

# Sympathetic neuron survival and proliferation are prolonged by loss of p53 and neurofibromin.
**Authors:** Vogel KS, Parada LF
**Journal:** Mol Cell Neurosci (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1006/mcne.1998.0670](https://doi.org/10.1006/mcne.1998.0670)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Neurosci. 1998 May;11(1-2):19-28. doi: 10.1006/mcne.1998.0670.

Sympathetic neuron survival and proliferation are prolonged by loss of p53 and 
neurofibromin.

Vogel KS(1), Parada LF.

Author information:
(1)Center for Developmental Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas 75235-9133, USA. kvogel@lsumc.edu

The proteins encoded by the p53 and Nf1 tumor suppressor genes are involved in 
cell signaling and regulation of proliferation during normal development and 
differentiation, as well as during tumor progression. To characterize the roles 
of these genes in the proliferation and survival of embryonic neurons, we have 
used dissociated cultures of sympathetic superior cervical ganglia (SCG) 
isolated from p53 and Nf1 single and compound-mutant mouse embryos. We have 
defined a temporal window for p53 involvement in sympathetic neuron survival and 
proliferation. Moreover, our results indicate that cooperativity between 
mutations in Nf1 and p53 prolongs SCG neuron proliferation and increases the 
incidence of neural tube defects in compound-mutant embryos.

DOI: 10.1006/mcne.1998.0670
PMID: 9608530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
