---
pmid: '17420451'
title: Analysis of PALB2/FANCN-associated breast cancer families.
authors:
- Tischkowitz M
- Xia B
- Sabbaghian N
- Reis-Filho JS
- Hamel N
- Li G
- van Beers EH
- Li L
- Khalil T
- Quenneville LA
- Omeroglu A
- Poll A
- Lepage P
- Wong N
- Nederlof PM
- Ashworth A
- Tonin PN
- Narod SA
- Livingston DM
- Foulkes WD
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC1871863
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0701724104
---

# Analysis of PALB2/FANCN-associated breast cancer families.
**Authors:** Tischkowitz M, Xia B, Sabbaghian N, Reis-Filho JS, Hamel N, Li G, van Beers EH, Li L, Khalil T, Quenneville LA, Omeroglu A, Poll A, Lepage P, Wong N, Nederlof PM, Ashworth A, Tonin PN, Narod SA, Livingston DM, Foulkes WD
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0701724104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0701724104)
**PMC:** [PMC1871863](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1871863/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Apr 17;104(16):6788-93. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0701724104. Epub 2007 Apr 9.

Analysis of PALB2/FANCN-associated breast cancer families.

Tischkowitz M(1), Xia B, Sabbaghian N, Reis-Filho JS, Hamel N, Li G, van Beers 
EH, Li L, Khalil T, Quenneville LA, Omeroglu A, Poll A, Lepage P, Wong N, 
Nederlof PM, Ashworth A, Tonin PN, Narod SA, Livingston DM, Foulkes WD.

Author information:
(1)Program in Cancer Genetics, Departments of Oncology and Human Genetics and 
Departments of Medicine and Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, QC, 
Canada.

No more than approximately 30% of hereditary breast cancer has been accounted 
for by mutations in known genes. Most of these genes, such as BRCA1, BRCA2, 
TP53, CHEK2, ATM, and FANCJ/BRIP1, function in DNA repair, raising the 
possibility that germ line mutations in other genes that contribute to this 
process also predispose to breast cancer. Given its close relationship with 
BRCA2, PALB2 was sequenced in affected probands from 68 BRCA1/BRCA2-negative 
breast cancer families of Ashkenazi Jewish, French Canadian, or mixed ethnic 
descent. The average BRCAPRO score was 0.58. A truncating mutation (229delT) was 
identified in one family with a strong history of breast cancer (seven breast 
cancers in three female mutation carriers). This mutation and its associated 
breast cancers were characterized with another recently reported but unstudied 
mutation (2521delA) that is also associated with a strong family history of 
breast cancer. There was no loss of heterozygosity in tumors with either 
mutation. Moreover, comparative genomic hybridization analysis showed major 
similarities to that of BRCA2 tumors but with some notable differences, 
especially loss of 18q, a change that was previously unknown in BRCA2 tumors and 
less common in sporadic breast cancer. This study supports recent observations 
that PALB2 mutations are present, albeit not frequently, in breast cancer 
families. The apparently high penetrance noted in this study suggests that at 
least some PALB2 mutations are associated with a substantially increased risk 
for the disease.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0701724104
PMCID: PMC1871863
PMID: 17420451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

No more than ≈30% of hereditary breast cancer has been accounted for by mutations in known genes. Most of these genes, such as BRCA1 , BRCA2 , TP53 , CHEK2 , ATM , and FANCJ/BRIP1 , function in DNA repair, raising the possibility that germ line mutations in other genes that contribute to this process also predispose to breast cancer. Given its close relationship with BRCA2 , PALB2 was sequenced in affected probands from 68 BRCA1/BRCA2 -negative breast cancer families of Ashkenazi Jewish, French Canadian, or mixed ethnic descent. The average BRCAPRO score was 0.58. A truncating mutation (229delT) was identified in one family with a strong history of breast cancer (seven breast cancers in three female mutation carriers). This mutation and its associated breast cancers were characterized with another recently reported but unstudied mutation (2521delA) that is also associated with a strong family history of breast cancer. There was no loss of heterozygosity in tumors with either mutation. Moreover, comparative genomic hybridization analysis showed major similarities to that of BRCA2 tumors but with some notable differences, especially loss of 18q, a change that was previously unknown in BRCA2 tumors and less common in sporadic breast cancer. This study supports recent observations that PALB2 mutations are present, albeit not frequently, in breast cancer families. The apparently high penetrance noted in this study suggests that at least some PALB2 mutations are associated with a substantially increased risk for the disease.

Discussion

The data presented here confirm that mutations in PALB2 are implicated in breast cancer predisposition. Here, we further characterized the PALB2 breast cancer phenotype in two significant aspects.

First, our results are consistent with the notion that some PALB2 mutations are associated with a relative risk for breast cancer that is greater than 2.3 ( 6 ). The five different monoallelic mutations identified in the familial breast cancer study by Rahman et al. ( 6 ) were all localized at the 3′ end of the gene, and none of the family histories of cancer were particularly strong. The median age of diagnosis of breast cancer was 46 years, and there was no preponderance of bilateral breast cancer compared with families without mutations. The 229delT sequence variant described here is the most 5′ deleterious mutation observed to date, and the strong breast cancer history associated with this mutation suggests that there may be a genotype-phenotype correlation. In this respect it is of interest that Erkko et al. ( 7 ) estimate the relative risk of breast cancer associated with Finnish founder mutation (1592delT) to be ≈4-fold increased. Clearly, more data on penetrance in other PALB2 families are needed before the clinical implications of mutations in this gene are fully apparent. With respect to the importance of PALB2 mutations to the burden of breast cancer, it is notable that the PALB2 gene lies on 16p12.1, a region that is not particularly associated with linkage in hereditary breast cancer families ( 11 ). The data presented here indicates that, outside of certain specific ethnic populations, PALB2 is responsible for a modest proportion of hereditary breast cancer cases (1.5%) and that PALB2 founder mutations in the AJ or FC populations are unlikely.

Second, analysis of PALB2 -related breast cancers showed that the tumor characteristics were clearly different from BRCA1 -related tumors. The tumors revealed some similarities to, but also some differences from, BRCA2 -related cancers. No consistent LOH of PALB2 was detected, in keeping with the observations of Erkko et al. ( 7 ), and CGH showed the presence of alterations such as +8q, +20q, +17q, −13q, and −6q that are all overrepresented in BRCA2 -related tumors ( 12 , 13 ). By contrast, all four tumors from the three patients analyzed revealed distal 18q loss, and losses at 1p and 7q were also frequent compared with BRCA2 -related tumors. The similarities of the clinical, LOH and CGH findings of the PALB2 -breast cancers studied are all of the more remarkable given the large range of age at diagnosis (29–98 years) in these cases. Even though only a small number of PALB2 -related tumors were analyzed, the consistent loss of 18q in particular is notable, given that it is rare in BRCA2 -related breast cancer ( 12 , 13 ). LOH ( 14 ) and CGH studies ( 15 , 16 ) suggest that 18q losses occur in at most 25–30% of sporadic breast cancers, and that this loss may be associated with a more aggressive phenotype ( 17 , 18 ). It is possible that the observed phenotype of PALB2 - related breast cancers reflects a particular carcinogenesis pathway that requires 18q loss. Indeed, if, in a larger series of cases, del18q remains a common characteristic of PALB2 - but not of BRCA2 -related breast cancers, then one could argue that, despite the dependence of BRCA2 upon PALB2 function, PALB2 -related breast carcinomas are not necessarily pure BRCA2 −/− breast cancer phenocopies.

Because no LOH was detected in the tumors, alternative mechanisms of PALB2 functional inactivation were investigated. C77fs, the product of 229delT, is a remarkable frameshift fusion protein in that it contains an unusually long “alien” tail, leading to the hypothesis that it can act in a dominant negative fashion or is oncogenic. However, it did not act in a dominant negative fashion in the HR assay, whether transiently or stably expressed (data not shown). Despite the lack of LOH, the possibility of a somatic mutation occurring on the retained allele has not been excluded. Another possibility is that PALB2 is a haploinsufficient tumor suppressor. Conceivably, the close relationship between PALB2 and BRCA2 is particularly sensitive to dosage effects, so reduced amounts of PALB2 affect BRCA2 function sufficiently to cause breast cancer, but only complete absence of PALB2 causes FA. In this respect, it is worth noting that all mutations identified in FA cases, thus far, have been truncating ( 4 , 5 ).

It remains unclear how heterozygous truncating PALB2 mutations promote breast cancer development. However, although as yet unproven, it seems unlikely that the mechanism requires a major dominant-negative effect by the truncated, mutant product on DNA cross link repair or HR. The presence of 18q deletions in the absence of LOH at PALB2 could indicate that a gene on 18q provides a missing functional link that will help in understanding the specific pathogenesis of PALB2 -related breast cancers. The identification and characterization of additional PALB2 mutations and the associated tumors, together with some insight into how PALB2 operates biochemically, may help to resolve this mystery.
