---
pmid: '14651853'
title: Integrated analysis of protein composition, tissue diversity, and gene regulation
  in mouse mitochondria.
authors:
- Mootha VK
- Bunkenborg J
- Olsen JV
- Hjerrild M
- Wisniewski JR
- Stahl E
- Bolouri MS
- Ray HN
- Sihag S
- Kamal M
- Patterson N
- Lander ES
- Mann M
journal: Cell
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00926-7
---

# Integrated analysis of protein composition, tissue diversity, and gene regulation in mouse mitochondria.
**Authors:** Mootha VK, Bunkenborg J, Olsen JV, Hjerrild M, Wisniewski JR, Stahl E, Bolouri MS, Ray HN, Sihag S, Kamal M, Patterson N, Lander ES, Mann M
**Journal:** Cell (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00926-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00926-7)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2003 Nov 26;115(5):629-40. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00926-7.

Integrated analysis of protein composition, tissue diversity, and gene 
regulation in mouse mitochondria.

Mootha VK(1), Bunkenborg J, Olsen JV, Hjerrild M, Wisniewski JR, Stahl E, 
Bolouri MS, Ray HN, Sihag S, Kamal M, Patterson N, Lander ES, Mann M.

Author information:
(1)MDS Proteomics, Odense 5230, Denmark.

Mitochondria are tailored to meet the metabolic and signaling needs of each 
cell. To explore its molecular composition, we performed a proteomic survey of 
mitochondria from mouse brain, heart, kidney, and liver and combined the results 
with existing gene annotations to produce a list of 591 mitochondrial proteins, 
including 163 proteins not previously associated with this organelle. The 
protein expression data were largely concordant with large-scale surveys of RNA 
abundance and both measures indicate tissue-specific differences in organelle 
composition. RNA expression profiles across tissues revealed networks of 
mitochondrial genes that share functional and regulatory mechanisms. We also 
determined a larger "neighborhood" of genes whose expression is closely 
correlated to the mitochondrial genes. The combined analysis identifies specific 
genes of biological interest, such as candidates for mtDNA repair enzymes, 
offers new insights into the biogenesis and ancestry of mammalian mitochondria, 
and provides a framework for understanding the organelle's contribution to human 
disease.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00926-7
PMID: 14651853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
