---
pmid: '3921014'
title: Properties of the NAD(P)H-dependent xylose reductase from the xylose-fermenting
  yeast Pichia stipitis.
authors:
- Verduyn C
- Van Kleef R
- Frank J
- Schreuder H
- Van Dijken JP
- Scheffers WA
journal: Biochem J
year: '1985'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1144764
doi: 10.1042/bj2260669
---

# Properties of the NAD(P)H-dependent xylose reductase from the xylose-fermenting yeast Pichia stipitis.
**Authors:** Verduyn C, Van Kleef R, Frank J, Schreuder H, Van Dijken JP, Scheffers WA
**Journal:** Biochem J (1985)
**DOI:** [10.1042/bj2260669](https://doi.org/10.1042/bj2260669)
**PMC:** [PMC1144764](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1144764/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 1985 Mar 15;226(3):669-77. doi: 10.1042/bj2260669.

Properties of the NAD(P)H-dependent xylose reductase from the xylose-fermenting 
yeast Pichia stipitis.

Verduyn C, Van Kleef R, Frank J, Schreuder H, Van Dijken JP, Scheffers WA.

Xylose reductase from the xylose-fermenting yeast Pichia stipitis was purified 
to electrophoretic and spectral homogeneity via ion-exchange, affinity and 
high-performance gel chromatography. The enzyme was active with various aldose 
substrates, such as DL-glyceraldehyde, L-arabinose, D-xylose, D-ribose, 
D-galactose and D-glucose. Hence the xylose reductase of Pichia stipitis is an 
aldose reductase (EC 1.1.1.21). Unlike all aldose reductases characterized so 
far, the enzyme from this yeast was active with both NADPH and NADH as coenzyme. 
The activity with NADH was approx. 70% of that with NADPH for the various aldose 
substrates. NADP+ was a potent inhibitor of both the NADPH- and NADH-linked 
xylose reduction, whereas NAD+ showed strong inhibition only with the 
NADH-linked reaction. These results are discussed in the context of the possible 
use of Pichia stipitis and similar yeasts for the anaerobic conversion of xylose 
into ethanol.

DOI: 10.1042/bj2260669
PMCID: PMC1144764
PMID: 3921014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Xylose reductase from the xylose-fermenting yeast Pichia stipitis was purified to electrophoretic and spectral homogeneity via ion-exchange, affinity and high-performance gel chromatography. The enzyme was active with various aldose substrates, such as DL-glyceraldehyde, L-arabinose, D-xylose, D-ribose, D-galactose and D-glucose. Hence the xylose reductase of Pichia stipitis is an aldose reductase (EC 1.1.1.21). Unlike all aldose reductases characterized so far, the enzyme from this yeast was active with both NADPH and NADH as coenzyme. The activity with NADH was approx. 70% of that with NADPH for the various aldose substrates. NADP+ was a potent inhibitor of both the NADPH- and NADH-linked xylose reduction, whereas NAD+ showed strong inhibition only with the NADH-linked reaction. These results are discussed in the context of the possible use of Pichia stipitis and similar yeasts for the anaerobic conversion of xylose into ethanol.
