---
pmid: '22178883'
title: CFTR and TMEM16A are separate but functionally related Cl- channels.
authors:
- Ousingsawat J
- Kongsuphol P
- Schreiber R
- Kunzelmann K
journal: Cell Physiol Biochem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1159/000335765
---

# CFTR and TMEM16A are separate but functionally related Cl- channels.
**Authors:** Ousingsawat J, Kongsuphol P, Schreiber R, Kunzelmann K
**Journal:** Cell Physiol Biochem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000335765](https://doi.org/10.1159/000335765)

## Abstract

1. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2011;28(4):715-24. doi: 10.1159/000335765. Epub 2011 Dec
 14.

CFTR and TMEM16A are separate but functionally related Cl- channels.

Ousingsawat J(1), Kongsuphol P, Schreiber R, Kunzelmann K.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Physiologie, Universität Regensburg, Universitätsstraße 31, 
Regensburg, Germany.

Previous reports point out to a functional relationship of the cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) and Ca(2+) activated Cl(-) channels 
(CaCC). Recent findings showing that TMEM16A forms the essential part of CaCC, 
prompted us to examine whether CFTR controls TMEM16A. Inhibition of endogenous 
CaCC by activation of endogenous CFTR was found in 16HBE human airway epithelial 
cells, which also express TMEM16A. In contrast, CFBE airway epithelial cells 
lack of CFTR expression, but express TMEM16A along with other TMEM16-proteins. 
These cells produce CaCC that is inhibited by overexpression and activation of 
CFTR. In HEK293 cells coexpressing TMEM16A and CFTR, whole cell currents 
activated by IMBX and forskolin were significantly reduced when compared with 
cells expressing CFTR only, while the halide permeability sequence of CFTR was 
not changed. Expression of TMEM16A, but not of TMEM16F, H or J, produced robust 
CaCC, which that were inhibited by CaCCinh-A01 and niflumic acid, but not by 
CFTRinh-172. TMEM16A-currents were attenuated by additional expression of CFTR, 
and were completely abrogated when additionally expressed CFTR was activated by 
IBMX and forskolin. On the other hand, CFTR-currents were attenuated by 
additional expression of TMEM16A. CFTR and TMEM16A were both membrane localized 
and could be coimmunoprecipitated. Intracellular Ca(2+) signals elicited by 
receptor-stimulation was not changed during activation of CFTR, while 
ionophore-induced rise in [Ca(2+)](i) was attenuated after stimulation of CFTR. 
The data indicate that both CFTR and TMEM16 proteins are separate molecular 
entities that show functional and molecular interaction.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000335765
PMID: 22178883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
