---
pmid: '15314155'
title: BRCA2 is ubiquitinated in vivo and interacts with USP11, a deubiquitinating
  enzyme that exhibits prosurvival function in the cellular response to DNA damage.
authors:
- Schoenfeld AR
- Apgar S
- Dolios G
- Wang R
- Aaronson SA
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC506974
doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.17.7444-7455.2004
---

# BRCA2 is ubiquitinated in vivo and interacts with USP11, a deubiquitinating enzyme that exhibits prosurvival function in the cellular response to DNA damage.
**Authors:** Schoenfeld AR, Apgar S, Dolios G, Wang R, Aaronson SA
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.24.17.7444-7455.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.17.7444-7455.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC506974](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC506974/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Sep;24(17):7444-55. doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.17.7444-7455.2004.

BRCA2 is ubiquitinated in vivo and interacts with USP11, a deubiquitinating 
enzyme that exhibits prosurvival function in the cellular response to DNA 
damage.

Schoenfeld AR(1), Apgar S, Dolios G, Wang R, Aaronson SA.

Author information:
(1)Derald H. Ruttenberg Cancer Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One 
Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1130, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Individuals carrying a germ line mutation of the breast cancer susceptibility 
gene BRCA2 are predisposed to breast, ovarian, and other types of cancer. The 
BRCA2 protein has been proposed to function in the repair of DNA double-strand 
breaks. Using an immunopurification-mass spectrometry approach to identify novel 
proteins that associate with the BRCA2 gene product, we found that a 
deubiquitinating enzyme, USP11, formed specific complexes with BRCA2. Moreover, 
BRCA2 was constitutively ubiquitinated in vivo in the absence of detectable 
proteasomal degradation. Mitomycin C (MMC) led to decreased BRCA2 protein levels 
associated with increased ubiquitination, consistent with proteasome-dependent 
degradation. While BRCA2 could be deubiquitinated by USP11 in transient 
overexpression assays, a catalytically inactive USP11 mutant had no effect on 
BRCA2 ubiquitination or protein levels. Antagonism of USP11 function either 
through expression of this mutant or through RNA interference increased cellular 
sensitivity to MMC in a BRCA2-dependent manner. All of these results imply that 
BRCA2 expression levels are regulated by ubiquitination in the cellular response 
to MMC-induced DNA damage and that USP11 participates in DNA damage repair 
functions within the BRCA2 pathway independently of BRCA2 deubiquitination.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Microbiology

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.17.7444-7455.2004
PMCID: PMC506974
PMID: 15314155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Individuals carrying a germ line mutation of the breast cancer susceptibility gene BRCA2 are predisposed to breast, ovarian, and other types of cancer. The BRCA2 protein has been proposed to function in the repair of DNA double-strand breaks. Using an immunopurification-mass spectrometry approach to identify novel proteins that associate with the BRCA2 gene product, we found that a deubiquitinating enzyme, USP11, formed specific complexes with BRCA2. Moreover, BRCA2 was constitutively ubiquitinated in vivo in the absence of detectable proteasomal degradation. Mitomycin C (MMC) led to decreased BRCA2 protein levels associated with increased ubiquitination, consistent with proteasome-dependent degradation. While BRCA2 could be deubiquitinated by USP11 in transient overexpression assays, a catalytically inactive USP11 mutant had no effect on BRCA2 ubiquitination or protein levels. Antagonism of USP11 function either through expression of this mutant or through RNA interference increased cellular sensitivity to MMC in a BRCA2-dependent manner. All of these results imply that BRCA2 expression levels are regulated by ubiquitination in the cellular response to MMC-induced DNA damage and that USP11 participates in DNA damage repair functions within the BRCA2 pathway independently of BRCA2 deubiquitination.

DISCUSSION

The BRCA2 protein has been proposed to function in the repair of DNA double-strand breaks by homologous recombination ( 37 ). BRCA2 binds to Rad51 ( 9 , 26 , 37 , 48 ) and can influence Rad51 recombinational activities ( 11 ). BRCA2-deficient cells are sensitive to DNA-damaging agents ( 9 , 32 , 37 , 52 ), show genomic instability ( 32 , 45 , 52 ), and are deficient in homology-directed DNA repair ( 28 , 44 ). Recent reports have shown that BRCA2 has DNA binding capabilities ( 51 ) and that specific BRCA2 mutations are responsible for the D1 subtype of Fanconi anemia ( 19 ), further supporting a role in the repair of DNA damage.

In the present studies, we identified USP11, a deubiquitinating enzyme initially cloned as a candidate gene for X-linked retinal disorders ( 39 ), as a component of in vivo complexes with an exogenously expressed C-terminal fragment of BRCA2. This interaction was shown to be specific, in that USP11 was not detected in complexes with another exogenously expressed BRCA2 fragment or with the GFP moiety used as a tag. We demonstrated stable complexes involving endogenous USP11 and wild-type BRCA2, although the nature of these interactions, whether direct or mediated by other members of a multiprotein complex, remains to be resolved. Consistent with the functional interaction, USP11 was shown to localize to the nucleus, the same subcellular compartment where BRCA2 is known to function ( 3 ).

A majority of BRCA2-inactivating mutations lead to C-terminal truncations, which not only impair BRCA2 nuclear localization ( 38 , 40 ) but also would inhibit its ability to form complexes with USP11. Mouse cells containing a targeted C-terminal truncation of BRCA2 have been shown to be hypersensitive to MMC ( 52 ), as are Fanconi anemia subtype D1 cells, which harbor biallelic truncating mutations in BRCA2 ( 19 , 35 ). We showed that overexpression of catalytically inactive USP11 or reduction of USP11 levels via RNA interference increased cellular sensitivity to MMC. Moreover, these effects were only seen in cells containing wild-type BRCA2, indicating that USP11 prosurvival effects in the cellular response to MMC-induced DNA damage were dependent on the BRCA2 pathway.

We demonstrated that the BRCA2 protein is ubiquitinated in vivo and that overexpressed USP11 can deubiquitinate BRCA2. However, BRCA2 was ubiquitinated at physiologic levels of BRCA2 and USP11, and its ubiquitination level was not increased as a result of USP11 antagonism either by the overexpression of mutant USP11 or by a targeted decrease in USP11 levels. These findings suggest that BRCA2 is not a physiologic substrate of USP11 and that BRCA2 ubiquitination observed as a consequence of USP11 overexpression likely relates to the ability of USP11 to form complexes with BRCA2. Instead, our results are consistent with the concept that USP11 functions in the BRCA2 pathway through its effects on another substrate and that BRCA2 may play a role in recruiting USP11 to its physiologic substrate.

USP11 was previously isolated in a yeast two-hybrid screen with the Ran binding protein (RanBPM) and was shown to catalyze the deubiquitination of RanBPM in vitro ( 20 ). In addition to roles at the nuclear pore complex, Ran influences the process of chromatin condensation and is required for coordinating the onset of mitosis with S-phase completion in mammalian cells ( 27 ). Targeting of Ran by viral oncoproteins results in centrosome amplification, a hallmark of tumor cells ( 21 ) that is also observed in BRCA2-deficient mouse embryo fibroblasts ( 45 ). The overexpression of a fragment of RanBPM, RanBP2, inhibited the formation of Rad51 foci ( 34 ), another BRCA2-dependent cellular event associated with DNA damage repair ( 15 , 53 ). Whether USP11 interactions with the Ran pathway or with other, as-yet-unidentified targets underlie its functions within the BRCA2 tumor suppressor network remains to be elucidated.

A number of proteins involved in DNA damage repair, including FancD2, PCNA, BRCA1, and histone H2AX, have been shown to be ubiquitinated ( 7 , 13 , 17 ). Moreover, for FancD2 and PCNA, ubiquitination has been linked with activation and/or regulation of their DNA damage repair functions ( 13 , 17 ). We observed that under physiologic conditions, BRCA2 was constitutively ubiquitinated without detectable evidence of proteasomal degradation. Previous studies have indicated that monoubiquitination or Lys-63 polyubiquitination may serve as a subcellular trafficking signal or as a binding site or recognition domain for other interacting proteins (reviewed in reference 36 ). Lys-63 polyubiquitination, as observed with PCNA ( 17 ), is conjugated by RAD6 and the MMS2-UBC13 heterodimer and plays a role in the error-free branch of postreplicative DNA repair ( 18 ). Of note, the BRCA1-BARD1 heterodimer contains E3 ubiquitin ligase activity and was recently shown to catalyze a Lys-6 polyubiquitin linkage ( 23 , 30 , 50 ). Since BRCA1 is found in a cellular complex with BRCA2 ( 8 , 12 ), it is possible that BRCA1-BARD1 mediates Lys-6 polyubiquitination of BRCA2 in untreated cells, although the nature of BRCA2 ubiquitination under these conditions remains to be resolved.

BRCA2 ubiquitinated in vivo following MMC exposure was shown to exhibit a different fate. We observed increased BRCA2 ubiquitination associated with decreased BRCA2 levels, and proteasome inhibition further increased BRCA2 ubiquitination. All of these findings imply that BRCA2 ubiquitination under these conditions is associated with proteasomal degradation. BRCA2 in MMC-treated cells presumably contains Lys-48 polyubiquitin, since Lys-48 polyubiquitination is known to be a signal for proteasome-dependent degradation ( 16 ). Previous studies indicated that BRCA2 is down-regulated at the mRNA level in response to UV irradiation or adriamycin ( 1 ), and UV radiation was shown to cause depletion of the BRCA2 protein by a nonproteasomal mechanism ( 46 ). These findings imply that distinct mechanisms may exist for BRCA2 down-regulation in response to different types of genotoxic stress. It remains to be established whether the increased ubiquitination and subsequent degradation of BRCA2 in response to MMC reflect its coupled activation and degradation or whether the removal of BRCA2 is necessary for the cell to respond to MMC-induced DNA damage. In either case, our findings that BRCA2 is ubiquitinated in vivo and undergoes proteasomal degradation in response to MMC treatment, in concert with the emerging role of ubiquitination in DNA damage repair, provide new insights into posttranslational modifications that may regulate the function of this important tumor suppressor protein.
