---
pmid: '8605876'
title: Phosphorylated interferon-alpha receptor 1 subunit (IFNaR1) acts as a docking
  site for the latent form of the 113 kDa STAT2 protein.
authors:
- Yan H
- Krishnan K
- Greenlund AC
- Gupta S
- Lim JT
- Schreiber RD
- Schindler CW
- Krolewski JJ
journal: EMBO J
year: '1996'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC450004
---

# Phosphorylated interferon-alpha receptor 1 subunit (IFNaR1) acts as a docking site for the latent form of the 113 kDa STAT2 protein.
**Authors:** Yan H, Krishnan K, Greenlund AC, Gupta S, Lim JT, Schreiber RD, Schindler CW, Krolewski JJ
**Journal:** EMBO J (1996)
**PMC:** [PMC450004](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC450004/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1996 Mar 1;15(5):1064-74.

Phosphorylated interferon-alpha receptor 1 subunit (IFNaR1) acts as a docking 
site for the latent form of the 113 kDa STAT2 protein.

Yan H(1), Krishnan K, Greenlund AC, Gupta S, Lim JT, Schreiber RD, Schindler CW, 
Krolewski JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Columbia-Presbyterian Cancer Center, Columbia 
University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Interferon-alpha (IFN alpha) induces rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of its 
receptors, two JAK kinases and three STAT transcription factors. One kinase, 
p135tyk2, is complexed with the IFNaR1 receptor, and may catalyze some of these 
phosphorylation events. We demonstrate that, in vitro, p135tyk2 phosphorylates 
two tyrosines on IFNaR1. A phosphopeptide corresponding to the major 
phosphorylation site (Tyr466) binds STAT2, but not STAT1, in an SH-2-dependent 
manner. Furthermore, only latent, non-phosphorylated STAT2 interacts with this 
phosphopeptide. When this phosphopeptide is introduced into permeabilized cells, 
the IFN alpha-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of both STATs is blocked. 
Finally, mutant versions of IFNaR1, in which Tyr466 is changed to phenylalanine, 
can act in a dominant negative manner to inhibit phosphorylation of STAT2. These 
observations are consistent with a model in which IFNaR1 mediates the 
interaction between JAK kinases and the STAT transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC450004
PMID: 8605876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Interferon-alpha (IFN alpha) induces rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of its receptors, two JAK kinases and three STAT transcription factors. One kinase, p135tyk2, is complexed with the IFNaR1 receptor, and may catalyze some of these phosphorylation events. We demonstrate that, in vitro, p135tyk2 phosphorylates two tyrosines on IFNaR1. A phosphopeptide corresponding to the major phosphorylation site (Tyr466) binds STAT2, but not STAT1, in an SH-2-dependent manner. Furthermore, only latent, non-phosphorylated STAT2 interacts with this phosphopeptide. When this phosphopeptide is introduced into permeabilized cells, the IFN alpha-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of both STATs is blocked. Finally, mutant versions of IFNaR1, in which Tyr466 is changed to phenylalanine, can act in a dominant negative manner to inhibit phosphorylation of STAT2. These observations are consistent with a model in which IFNaR1 mediates the interaction between JAK kinases and the STAT transcription factors.
