---
pmid: '28463231'
title: Disruption of lineage specification in adult pulmonary mesenchymal progenitor
  cells promotes microvascular dysfunction.
authors:
- Gaskill CF
- Carrier EJ
- Kropski JA
- Bloodworth NC
- Menon S
- Foronjy RF
- Taketo MM
- Hong CC
- Austin ED
- West JD
- Means AL
- Loyd JE
- Merryman WD
- Hemnes AR
- De Langhe S
- Blackwell TS
- Klemm DJ
- Majka SM
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5451236
doi: 10.1172/JCI88629
---

# Disruption of lineage specification in adult pulmonary mesenchymal progenitor cells promotes microvascular dysfunction.
**Authors:** Gaskill CF, Carrier EJ, Kropski JA, Bloodworth NC, Menon S, Foronjy RF, Taketo MM, Hong CC, Austin ED, West JD, Means AL, Loyd JE, Merryman WD, Hemnes AR, De Langhe S, Blackwell TS, Klemm DJ, Majka SM
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI88629](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI88629)
**PMC:** [PMC5451236](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5451236/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 2017 Jun 1;127(6):2262-2276. doi: 10.1172/JCI88629. Epub 2017
May  2.

Disruption of lineage specification in adult pulmonary mesenchymal progenitor 
cells promotes microvascular dysfunction.

Gaskill CF(1), Carrier EJ(1), Kropski JA(1), Bloodworth NC(2), Menon S(3), 
Foronjy RF(4), Taketo MM(5), Hong CC(1)(6), Austin ED(7), West JD(1), Means 
AL(8), Loyd JE(1), Merryman WD(2), Hemnes AR(1), De Langhe S(9), Blackwell 
TS(1), Klemm DJ(10)(11), Majka SM(1)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy, Pulmonary and Critical Care 
Medicine or Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, Nashville, Tennessee USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, 
Tennessee USA.
(3)Pulmonary Vascular Research Institute, Kochi, and AnalyzeDat Consulting 
Services, Kerala, India.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, 
SUNY Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York, USA.
(5)Kyoto University, Sakyo, Kyoto, Japan.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine or Department of Medicine, 
Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, and.
(8)Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA.
(9)National Jewish Health, Denver, Colorado, USA.
(10)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Gates Center 
for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Biology, University of Colorado, Aurora, 
Colorado, USA.
(11)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Eastern Colorado Health 
Care System, Denver, Colorado, USA.
(12)Vanderbilt Center for Stem Cell Biology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA.

Pulmonary vascular disease is characterized by remodeling and loss of 
microvessels and is typically attributed to pathological responses in vascular 
endothelium or abnormal smooth muscle cell phenotypes. We have challenged this 
understanding by defining an adult pulmonary mesenchymal progenitor cell (MPC) 
that regulates both microvascular function and angiogenesis. The current 
understanding of adult MPCs and their roles in homeostasis versus disease has 
been limited by a lack of genetic markers with which to lineage label 
multipotent mesenchyme and trace the differentiation of these MPCs into vascular 
lineages. Here, we have shown that lineage-labeled lung MPCs expressing the 
ATP-binding cassette protein ABCG2 (ABCG2+) are pericyte progenitors that 
participate in microvascular homeostasis as well as adaptive angiogenesis. 
Activation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling, either autonomously or downstream of 
decreased BMP receptor signaling, enhanced ABCG2+ MPC proliferation but 
suppressed MPC differentiation into a functional pericyte lineage. Thus, 
enhanced Wnt/β-catenin signaling in ABCG2+ MPCs drives a phenotype of persistent 
microvascular dysfunction, abnormal angiogenesis, and subsequent exacerbation of 
bleomycin-induced fibrosis. ABCG2+ MPCs may, therefore, account in part for the 
aberrant microvessel function and remodeling that are associated with chronic 
lung diseases.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI88629
PMCID: PMC5451236
PMID: 28463231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.

## Full Text

Abstract

Pulmonary vascular disease is characterized by remodeling and loss of microvessels and is typically attributed to pathological responses in vascular endothelium or abnormal smooth muscle cell phenotypes. We have challenged this understanding by defining an adult pulmonary mesenchymal progenitor cell (MPC) that regulates both microvascular function and angiogenesis. The current understanding of adult MPCs and their roles in homeostasis versus disease has been limited by a lack of genetic markers with which to lineage label multipotent mesenchyme and trace the differentiation of these MPCs into vascular lineages. Here, we have shown that lineage-labeled lung MPCs expressing the ATP-binding cassette protein ABCG2 (ABCG2 + ) are pericyte progenitors that participate in microvascular homeostasis as well as adaptive angiogenesis. Activation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling, either autonomously or downstream of decreased BMP receptor signaling, enhanced ABCG2 + MPC proliferation but suppressed MPC differentiation into a functional pericyte lineage. Thus, enhanced Wnt/β-catenin signaling in ABCG2 + MPCs drives a phenotype of persistent microvascular dysfunction, abnormal angiogenesis, and subsequent exacerbation of bleomycin-induced fibrosis. ABCG2 + MPCs may, therefore, account in part for the aberrant microvessel function and remodeling that are associated with chronic lung diseases.

Introduction

Microvascular dysfunction is a key component of chronic lung disease, which is the fourth-leading cause of mortality worldwide. Changes in distal lung tissue structure include enlarged, obstructed, or fibrotic airspaces, decreased microvascular density, and ultimately loss of gas exchange surfaces. A common comorbidity in chronic lung diseases is vasculopathy, or pulmonary vascular dysfunction (PVD), characterized by remodeling and loss of microvessels, which substantially worsens prognosis and limits survival. The relevance of neovascularization to the pathophysiology of PVD has not been resolved, as conflicting evidence depicts angiogenesis as both reparative and pathologic.

The importance of identifying barriers to vascular regeneration in the adult lung is underscored by the current emphasis on cell therapy and bioengineering approaches to address pulmonary vascular pathologies. However, without understanding the endogenous cells that mitigate damage and promote healing, targeted cell or small-molecule therapies and 3D tissue reconstruction will not achieve success. Adult tissue regeneration and repair may in part be attributed to tissue-resident stem cells within the mesenchymal compartment that are capable of vascular differentiation ( 1 ). To date, our understanding of the basic biology of adult pulmonary MPCs and the roles they play in microvascular homeostasis versus disease is limited.

MPCs have long been thought to be the “mural” precursor to a differentiated pericyte ( 2 , 3 ). Interestingly, pericytes have also been hypothesized to be mesenchymal stem cells in adult tissue ( 4 ), however, recent studies using lineage tracing have disproved this theory ( 5 ). The current understanding of the role pericytes and their mesenchymal precursors play in adult lung disease, de novo angiogenesis, and vascular remodeling is controversial, as conflicting evidence depicts angiogenesis as both reparative and pathologic ( 6 – 8 ). The consensus is that pericytes differentiate toward a myofibroblast lineage and participate in pathological processes. However, a specific role for these cells during fibrosis or adaptive angiogenesis has not yet been defined ( 9 – 16 ). While these hypotheses are intriguing, the studies of tissue-resident stromal progenitor cells as well as the origin of pericyte lineages in the adult have been complicated by a lack of unique markers to define specific cell types within heterogeneous mesenchymal pericyte precursors and lineage-specified pericyte populations ( Supplemental Table 1 ; supplemental material available online with this article; https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI88629DS1 ). A second limitation is the ability to translate findings from cell populations identified in murine tissues to human cells.

In accordance with these gaps in knowledge, the cell-specific mechanisms that regulate the development and progression of the microvascular dysfunction associated with PVD in chronic adult lung diseases are not well defined. PVD is often asymptomatic until severe, when approximately 50% to 70% of the pulmonary vascular bed is lost, both in structure and function, at which point pulmonary vascular resistance and pulmonary artery pressure rise, leading to a diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension (PH) or pulmonary artery hypertension (PAH) ( 17 ). Major risks for the development of PVD and PH include genetic mutation, environment (hypoxia, drugs), and immune deregulation and associated diseases ( 17 , 18 ). To date, the etiology of microvascular remodeling underlying PVD remains unknown and is complicated by a lack of rodent models recapitulating early-stage vasculopathy in the absence of or prior to injury. The current limited understanding of microvascular dysfunction as a precursor to PVD and the lack of diagnostic approaches and criteria emphasize the necessity to understand the mechanisms of microvascular dysfunction in both rodent models and the clinical setting.

To address the aforementioned issues, our laboratory has identified a unique and traceable subpopulation of perivascular, multipotent, lineage-negative MPCs in both adult mouse and human lung on the basis of their expression of ATP-binding cassette subfamily G member 2 ( ABCG2) . Using a combination of flow cytometry and a low-dose tamoxifen induction lineage-tracing strategy, we defined ABCG2 as a marker to reproducibly label a subpopulation of adult lung MPCs ( 12 , 19 ). In these studies, we demonstrate for the first time to our knowledge that ABCG2 + lung MPCs participate in microvascular homeostasis and distal lung tissue structure via pericyte specification and differentiation. We show, in both murine and human ABCG2 + lung MPCs, that increased Wnt/β-catenin signaling results in abnormal expansion as well as pericyte specification of MPCs without normal pericyte maturation, driving a phenotype of persistent microvascular dysfunction. In response to genetic depletion of BMP receptor type II (BMPR2), stabilization of β-catenin, or bleomycin induced fibrosis, the resultant MPC-derived pericytes resemble myofibroblasts. However, the deregulated pericytes participate in adaptive angiogenesis and exacerbate fibrosis as opposed to directly contributing to fibrotic scar formation. Defects in ABCG2 + pericyte progenitor maturation elicit pathological changes in the microvasculature that mirror vasculopathy before overt clinical symptoms of disease appear. This suggests that a better understanding of the role of these MPCs in the maintenance of microvascular integrity in the lungs may lead to earlier diagnosis and treatment of PVD.

Discussion

The findings from these studies expand our understanding of the role lung MPCs, and the pericytes derived from them, play during pulmonary microvascular homeostasis and adaptive angiogenesis following injury. We demonstrate that ABCG2 + MPCs directly influence lung microvascular function. Specifically, this work delineates that the coordinated regulation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in ABCG2 + mesenchymal pericyte progenitors, autonomously or downstream of BMPR/TGF-β signaling, is a key determinant of lung microvascular integrity and is intimately linked with the alveolar epithelium. Indeed, increased canonical Wnt signaling enhanced ABCG2 + MPC proliferation and promoted the specification of these cells to functionally deficient, proangiogenic pericytes, in lieu of their active contribution to myofibroblast accumulation with fibrosis ( Figure 6 ). Importantly, these findings affirm that maintaining a proper balance of Wnt signaling in lung ABCG2 + MPCs promotes proper pericyte development for the maintenance of microvascular homeostasis and the regulation of angiogenesis following injury.

Pericytes may be considered the SMC of the microvessels or capillary beds ( 28 , 56 ). While related in lineage, the pericyte is typically more intimately associated with the endothelium than are vSMCs, which are also distinguished by location, morphology, and markers ( 57 ). vSMC phenotypic plasticity has been described in multiorgan development as well as in various adult diseases characterized by vascular remodeling ( 49 , 50 ). The plasticity of vSMCs is represented by 2 major phenotypes: differentiated and contractile and dedifferentiated, proliferative, migratory, and synthetic ( 48 – 50 ), similar to the differentiation of MPCs into the pericyte lineage we have documented in these studies. To date, the molecular mechanisms underlying the phenotypic switches and their regulation of homeostasis and adaptive versus pathological angiogenesis remain to be deciphered. Thus, there is a paucity of knowledge defining the process of de novo pericyte differentiation and maturation from the amorphous mesenchyme in the adult lung. Appropriate mesenchymal specification to pericytes is likely important during microvascular homeostasis, maintenance of the distal airspace structure, and development of the vascular dysfunction associated with chronic lung diseases ( 58 ).

The lack of suitable markers to trace mesenchymal-to-pericyte differentiation in the adult lung has limited our understanding of the role of pericytes in homeostasis and disease. Here, we established ABCG2 as a genetic marker that facilitates the study of adult pericyte progenitor specification from the pulmonary mesenchyme. While ABCG2 has been used as a marker of adult tissue stem cells, first in bone marrow hematopoietic stem cells (BM-HSCs), followed by our work defining ABCG2 + BM– and skeletal muscle–derived angioblasts ( 59 , 60 ), its use as a genetic marker for adult mesenchymal pericyte progenitors has not, to our knowledge, been previously reported. Currently, there is no lung-specific vascular cell marker to study lineage tracing in adult diseases. For example, PDGFRβ and GLI family zinc finger 1 (GLI1) have been used to trace mesenchymal cells during fibrosis and development, but these markers label mixed mesenchymal cell populations as well as epithelial cell lineages in the adult, respectively ( Supplemental Table 1 ) ( 61 – 63 ). Last, current models rely on smooth muscle protein 22 α–driven (SM220driven) or SM-MHC–driven Cre systems to manipulate genes in lung smooth muscle ( 64 – 66 ), but SM22 and SM-MHC demonstrate systemic expression. Endothelial cell lineage tracing has been reported using Tie2-Cre ( 67 ), which labels mesenchymal cells as well as circulating BM-derived angioblasts ( 59 ). The results of these studies validate the use of ABCG2 as a genetic marker to study resident mesenchymal pericyte progenitors in the adult lung during homeostasis repair and disease processes.

The validation of ABCG2 as a marker of adult mesenchymal pericyte progenitors enabled us to determine how the genetic stabilization of β-catenin in these cells or depletion of BMPR2 affected pericyte formation and lung microvascular function. Conditional genetic stabilization of β-catenin or depletion of BMPR2 in ABCG2 + MPCs in vivo resulted in the expansion of this progenitor pool. These cells exhibited pericyte lineage specification in vitro, however, they did not assume contractile function or expression of smooth muscle actin in our in vivo or in vitro studies. Early expansion of the mesenchymal progenitors correlated with pulmonary vascular leak, likely as a result of decreased association of the mesenchymal progenitors with the microvascular endothelium. Vascular leak is a key indicator of vascular endothelial dysfunction and is known to precede remodeling, including both microvessel pruning and muscularization ( 68 ). Thus, our findings indicate that ABCG2 + MPC-to-pericyte differentiation is an important determinant in the maintenance of proper lung function and health.

The impact of ABCG2 + mesenchymal progenitors on tissue function probably increased as these progenitors accumulated over time. In fact, prolonged ABCG2 + stabilization of β-catenin and depletion of BMPR2 decreased terminal or functional pericyte differentiation, which was confirmed by the reduced expression of α-SMA and the loss of F8 + microvessel density in vivo. The distal airspace enlargement was likely due to the loss of mesenchymal progenitor function, compounded by the loss of the supporting microvasculature. The idea of a vascular component contributing to the loss of distal lung tissue structure or emphysema/chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has been demonstrated with the use of SUGEN5416 as a VEGF blockade ( 69 ), since VEGF is a survival factor for both lung endothelial and mesenchymal cells ( 70 ). These studies highlight the fact that intact ABCG2 mesenchymal progenitor function is necessary to maintain both microvascular and alveolar epithelial survival and lung function.

Pulmonary microvascular function is impaired in both PAH and IPF as a consequence of remodeling and collagen deposition or of fibrosis, which are associated with the microvascular structures. The etiology of early or adaptive microvascular remodeling remains unknown and is complicated by conflicting evidence of angiogenesis as reparative or pathologic in both PAH and IPF ( 6 – 8 , 13 , 71 , 72 ). Contradictory data also suggest that microvessel density decreases or increases during IPF, depending on the localization and severity of fibrosis ( 6 – 8 ). In our murine models of bleomycin-induced fibrosis, ABCG2 + MPCs associated with “traditional” α-SMA + or F8 + microvessels in alveolar tissue peripheral to the actively remodeling regions. However, in βOE lung tissue, we detected MPC contribution to atypical vascular structures in the fibrotic areas that were devoid of both F8 endothelium and α-SMA, which may be the reason the traditional vascular density was seen to be decreased in the scar region ( 6 – 8 ). The finding of these structures in βOE, but not WT, lung tissue may be due to the increase in labeled lineage-derived cells (3-fold more than in WT tissue). Additionally, the increased expression of NG2 or decreased CD105 by these cells may increase their angiogenic and invasive nature ( 31 , 36 ). However, whether increased Wnt signaling in MPCs results in long-term fibrosis or enhanced repair is an avenue of current investigation.

In these studies, we provide the first evidence to our knowledge that Wnt/β-catenin signaling regulates MPC-derived pericyte progenitor angiogenic function during fibrosis in the dense fibroblast “scar” region. Translating our findings in murine lungs to human disease, we identified luminal NG2 + microvessels in IPF lung tissue. These alternative vascular structures have been described as leading angiogenic tubes composed of pericytes during development, as well as adult tumor vasculature, where nontraditional angiogenesis was previously termed “vascular mimicry” ( 73 – 77 ). Abnormal vessels formed by pericytes or epithelial cells regulate cell metastases, inflammation, and the overall tumor microenvironment. In addition to influencing angiogenesis and the subsequent recruitment of endothelium, these pericytes may also influence the surrounding myofibroblasts, as pericytes in the skin have also been shown to regulate the recruitment of epithelium during wound healing in the absence of angiogenesis ( 78 ). Such mesenchyme-derived tubes could influence the extent of injury or fibrosis by influencing the tissue microenvironment.

Our current and previous studies directly link increased β-catenin signaling with deregulated BMPR signaling ( 22 , 79 ). These data suggest that intact BMP signaling promotes the differentiation of pulmonary mesenchymal pericyte progenitors and suppresses Wnt/β-catenin signaling, which is required for the self-renewal and proliferation of progenitor pools. Another important observation from these studies is that conditional genetic depletion of BMPR2, stabilization of β-catenin in ABCG2 + MPCs, as well as bleomycin injury in vivo resulted in expansion of the progenitor pool, while terminal contractile function was not achieved. Previous studies have also reported the expansion of undifferentiated progenitor pools in other systems as a result of genetic depletion of BMPR, a decrease of BMP signaling, or an increase of β-catenin activation ( 80 – 88 ). Conditionally decreased BMPR signaling in adult mice drove the expansion of progenitor pools in which terminal differentiation in multiple cell types was inhibited via the activation of β-catenin signaling ( 80 – 82 ). β-Catenin signaling has also been identified as an essential component of stem cell, mesenchymal cell, and SMC proliferation and differentiation in multiple models of development ( 83 – 88 ). Therefore, the effects of Wnt/β-catenin activation are specific to the cell type, stage of differentiation, and the factors present in the microenvironment.

Studies of adult differentiated vSMCs and pericytes have previously reported the coordinated regulation of both canonical and noncanonical Wnt signaling by BMP. Genetic mutations in the BMPR2 gene or dysregulated BMPR2 signaling are associated with the development of PVD including pulmonary veno-occlusive disease (PVOD) ( 89 ), PAH ( 90 , 91 ), as well as PH associated with COPD and pulmonary fibrosis (PF) ( 92 ). Thus, impaired BMPR2 signaling is a unifying feature in the pathogenesis of PVD and the development of PH. Here, we demonstrate for the first time to our knowledge that coordinated canonical Wnt/BMPR2 signaling has an impact on distal lung architecture by regulating MPC-to-pericyte differentiation and that deregulated BMPR/Wnt signaling is present in human IPF lung MPCs. In WT SMCs, BMP signaling activates both β-catenin and noncanonical Wnt pathways, which regulate SMC proliferation and motility in response to stimuli ( 20 ). Primary pericytes derived from IPAH or WT lung explants demonstrate a decreased association with microvessels in vitro that is attributed to abnormal noncanonical Wnt signaling ( 93 ). In contrast, increased noncanonical Wnt signaling in endothelial cells increases their survival and decreases vascular pruning in vivo and in vitro ( 94 ). Canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling is required for SMC development and terminal differentiation, while in the absence of SMC differentiation, adventitial precursors may proliferate ( 85 ). These studies illustrated that a differentiation defect in perivascular cells influences the surrounding mesenchyme as well as fibroblast specification, further illustrating the cell-specific and complex nature of Wnt signaling during vascular homeostasis.

In summary, our studies illustrate that ABCG2 + lung MPCs participate in microvascular homeostasis and distal lung tissue structure via pericyte specification and differentiation. We show, in both murine and human ABCG2 + lung MPCs, that increased Wnt/β-catenin signaling results in abnormal expansion as well as pericyte specification of MPCs without normal pericyte maturation, driving a phenotype of persistent microvascular dysfunction. Therefore, the identification of alterations in MPC signaling and function will likely lead to the identification of novel interventional strategies. Treatment at an early stage of microvascular dysfunction may be most effective at decreasing progression or reversing the disease processes, improving the outcome and survival of patients at risk for PH. More broadly, this knowledge may be applied to the microvascular dysfunction associated with other adult epithelial tissues, including skin and kidney.

Methods

Supplemental Experimental Procedures and associated references are provided in the supplemental materials.
