---
pmid: '16428300'
title: 'Link between the ubiquitin conjugation system and the ISG15 conjugation system:
  ISG15 conjugation to the UbcH6 ubiquitin E2 enzyme.'
authors:
- Takeuchi T
- Iwahara S
- Saeki Y
- Sasajima H
- Yokosawa H
journal: J Biochem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/jb/mvi172
---

# Link between the ubiquitin conjugation system and the ISG15 conjugation system: ISG15 conjugation to the UbcH6 ubiquitin E2 enzyme.
**Authors:** Takeuchi T, Iwahara S, Saeki Y, Sasajima H, Yokosawa H
**Journal:** J Biochem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jb/mvi172](https://doi.org/10.1093/jb/mvi172)

## Abstract

1. J Biochem. 2005 Dec;138(6):711-9. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvi172.

Link between the ubiquitin conjugation system and the ISG15 conjugation system: 
ISG15 conjugation to the UbcH6 ubiquitin E2 enzyme.

Takeuchi T(1), Iwahara S, Saeki Y, Sasajima H, Yokosawa H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0812.

ISG15 is a ubiquitin-like protein that is upregulated on treatment with 
interferon. ISG15 is considered to be covalently conjugated to cellular proteins 
through a sequential reaction similar to that of the ubiquitin conjugation 
system consisting of E1/E2/E3 enzymes: UBE1L and UbcH8 have been reported to 
function as E1 and E2 enzymes, respectively, for ISG15 conjugation. Several 
cellular proteins have been identified as targets for ISG15 conjugation, but the 
roles of ISG15 conjugation remain unclear. In this study, we found that UbcH6 
and UbcH8, E2 enzymes for ubiquitin conjugation, are covalently modified by 
ISG15. We also found that UbcH6 is capable of forming a thioester intermediate 
with ISG15 through Cys131. We determined that the Lys136 residue near the 
catalytic site Cys131 is the ISG15 conjugation site in UbcH6. We isolated 
ISG15-modified and unmodified UbcH6 proteins, and analyzed their abilities to 
form thioester intermediates with ubiquitin. A ubiquitin thioester intermediate 
was detected in the case of unmodified UbcH6, but not in that of ISG15-modified 
UbcH6, strongly suggesting that ISG15 conjugation to UbcH6 suppresses its 
ubiquitin E2 enzyme activity. Thus, we provide evidence for a link between the 
ubiquitin conjugation system and the ISG15 conjugation system.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvi172
PMID: 16428300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
