---
pmid: '20532808'
title: Interleukin-33 stimulates formation of functional osteoclasts from human CD14(+)
  monocytes.
authors:
- Mun SH
- Ko NY
- Kim HS
- Kim JW
- Kim DK
- Kim AR
- Lee SH
- Kim YG
- Lee CK
- Lee SH
- Kim BK
- Beaven MA
- Kim YM
- Choi WS
journal: Cell Mol Life Sci
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC3399252
doi: 10.1007/s00018-010-0410-y
---

# Interleukin-33 stimulates formation of functional osteoclasts from human CD14(+) monocytes.
**Authors:** Mun SH, Ko NY, Kim HS, Kim JW, Kim DK, Kim AR, Lee SH, Kim YG, Lee CK, Lee SH, Kim BK, Beaven MA, Kim YM, Choi WS
**Journal:** Cell Mol Life Sci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00018-010-0410-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-010-0410-y)
**PMC:** [PMC3399252](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3399252/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2010 Nov;67(22):3883-92. doi: 10.1007/s00018-010-0410-y.
Epub  2010 Jun 8.

Interleukin-33 stimulates formation of functional osteoclasts from human CD14(+) 
monocytes.

Mun SH(1), Ko NY, Kim HS, Kim JW, Kim DK, Kim AR, Lee SH, Kim YG, Lee CK, Lee 
SH, Kim BK, Beaven MA, Kim YM, Choi WS.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences and Technology, Konkuk University, Chungju, 
Korea.

Interleukin (IL)-33 is a recently described pro-inflammatory cytokine. Here we 
demonstrate IL-33 as a regulator of functional osteoclasts (OCs) from human 
CD14(+) monocytes. IL-33 stimulates formation of tartrate-resistant acid 
phosphatase (TRAP)(+) multinuclear OCs from monocytes. This action was 
suppressed by anti-ST2 antibody, suggesting that IL-33 acts through its receptor 
ST2, but not by the receptor activator of NF-κB ligand (RANKL) decoy, 
osteoprotegerin, or anti-RANKL antibody. IL-33 stimulated activating 
phosphorylations of signaling molecules in monocytes that are critical for OC 
development. These included Syk, phospholipase Cγ2, Gab2, MAP kinases, TAK-1, 
and NF-κB. IL-33 also enhanced expression of OC differentiation factors 
including TNF-α receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6), nuclear factor of 
activated T cells cytoplasmic 1, c-Fos, c-Src, cathepsin K, and calcitonin 
receptor. IL-33 eventually induced bone resorption. This study suggests that the 
osteoclastogenic property of IL-33 is mediated through TRAF6 as well as the 
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif-dependent Syk/PLCγ pathway in 
human CD14(+) monocytes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-010-0410-y
PMCID: PMC3399252
PMID: 20532808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Interleukin (IL)-33 is a recently described pro-inflammatory cytokine. Here we demonstrate IL-33 as a regulator of functional osteoclasts (OCs) from human CD14 + monocytes. IL-33 stimulates formation of tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) + multinuclear OCs from monocytes. This action was suppressed by anti-ST2 antibody, suggesting that IL-33 acts through its receptor ST2, but not by the receptor activator of NF-κB ligand (RANKL) decoy, osteoprotegerin, or anti-RANKL antibody. IL-33 stimulated activating phosphorylations of signaling molecules in monocytes that are critical for OC development. These included Syk, phospholipase Cγ2, Gab2, MAP kinases, TAK-1, and NF-κB. IL-33 also enhanced expression of OC differentiation factors including TNF-α receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6), nuclear factor of activated T cells cytoplasmic 1, c-Fos, c-Src, cathepsin K, and calcitonin receptor. IL-33 eventually induced bone resorption. This study suggests that the osteoclastogenic property of IL-33 is mediated through TRAF6 as well as the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif-dependent Syk/PLCγ pathway in human CD14 + monocytes.

Introduction

Enhanced osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption underlie osteopenic diseases including rheumatoid arthritis (RA) [ 1 , 2 ]. Bone erosion in inflammatory bone diseases is critically dependent on multinucleated osteoclasts (OCs), which arise from hematopoietic myeloid progenitors [ 3 ] and can be derived from human CD14 + monocytes [ 4 , 5 ]. Osteoclastogenesis is classically regulated by macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) [ 6 ] and the receptor activator of NF-κB ligand (RANKL) [ 7 ]. M-CSF is critical for the proliferation and survival of the OC precursor cells whereas RANKL orchestrates the whole process of OC differentiation and action [ 8 , 9 ]. M-CSF, through its receptor c-Fms, activates Akt and ERK1/2 to ensure proliferation and survival of the OC lineage [ 10 ]. The interaction of RANKL with its receptor, RANK, results in engagement of TNF receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) and downstream activation of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases, the nuclear factor κB (NF-κB), and activator protein-1 (AP-1) [ 8 , 9 ]. However, productive RANK signaling also requires co-option of the adaptor protein, DAP12, and the Fc-receptor common γ subunit (FcRγ) after phosphorylation of their immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) by c-Src kinase [ 11 ]. This interaction results in cooperative signaling through the activation of Syk tyrosine kinase and ultimately the activation of nuclear factor of activated T cells cytoplasmic 1 (NFATc1).

The recently described cytokine interleukin (IL)-33 is now thought to participate in a variety of inflammatory diseases. Early studies revealed that it is expressed in intestine of patients with Crohn’s disease, blood vessels of inflamed tonsils, and synovium of patients with RA and that this expression appeared to correlate with the severity of the inflammatory condition [ 12 ]. The administration of IL-33 to mice results in substantial pathological changes indicative of Th2 responses including eosinophilia in various organs, epithelial hyperplasia, augmented production of Th2-related cytokines, elevated serum IgA and IgE levels, and mucus secretion [ 13 ]. Recent studies suggest that IL-33 may also act as a proinflammatory cytokine in asthma, septic shock, fibroproliferative diseases, collagen vascular diseases, pleural malignancy, and cardiovascular diseases [ 14 ]. However, it is still unknown whether IL-33 has the critical role in osteoclastogenesis.

IL-33 acts through ST2, which was initially recognized as an orphan receptor associated with inflammatory and autoimmune diseases [ 13 ], is now known to be a member of Toll-like/IL-1 receptor family [ 14 , 15 ]. Like other members of this family, ST2 contains a Toll/IL-1 receptor (TIR) domain that permits recruitment of TIR domain-containing adaptor protein, myeloid differentiating factor 88 [ 13 , 14 , 16 ] and, in turn, IL-1 receptor-associated kinases (IRAKs) and TRAF6. The engagement of TRAF6 leads to activation of the MAP kinases, ERK1/2 [ 13 , 17 ], Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and p38, as well as NF-κB pathway [ 18 – 20 ].

The transmembrane form of ST2 (as opposed to the soluble form, sST2) is expressed predominantly on mast cells and Th2 cells. Indeed, functional studies of ST2 indicate a role in inflammatory disorders that are associated with these two types of cells [ 14 ]. Recently, it was also reported that IL-33 exacerbates antigen-induced arthritis by activating mast cells [ 21 ] and inhibition of IL-33 signaling attenuates the severity of bone erosion in an experimental arthritis animal model [ 22 ]. These observations suggested to us that IL-33, directly or indirectly, alters bone homeostasis through increased OC differentiation and activity.

Here we report that IL-33, acting specifically through ST2, regulates the formation of OCs from human peripheral blood CD14 + monocytes and bone resorption. Our studies reveal novel features of IL-33-mediated signaling in CD14 + monocytes which are the source of OC progenitors. They also reveal that although IL-33 acts independently of RANKL in human CD14 + monocytes, it shares many of the signaling and functional attributes of RANKL.

Discussion

Osteoclasts are multinucleated cells formed by fusion of mononuclear phagocyte precursors and are the cells responsible for bone resorption in RA and other bone-related diseases [ 4 , 5 ]. It is generally accepted that RANKL is essential for osteoclast formation and function [ 2 ] as well as heightened OC activity in RA [ 25 ]. Patients with active RA have higher levels of RANKL than do healthy adults or patients with inactive RA [ 26 ]. However, RANKL-independent factors such as TNF-α [ 27 ], LIGHT [ 28 ], IL-8 [ 29 ], and secreted osteoclastogenic factor of activated T cells [ 30 ] were recently reported as additional factors promoting OC differentiation although their effects and mechanisms of action have yet to be determined in vivo.

IL-33 was recently identified as a ligand for the orphan IL-1 family receptor T1/ST2 and is mainly expressed in smooth-muscle cells, epithelial cells, fibroblasts, keratinocytes, dendritic cells, and activated macrophages [ 13 ]. It has been suggested previously that IL-33 has a proinflammatory function in arthritis and that IL-33 and ST2 are detectable in the synovium of patients with RA [ 12 ]. The presence of IL-33 may enable stimulation of synovial tissue-resident cells and thus maintain the inflammatory state. In collagen-induced arthritis animals, disabling IL-33 function by soluble ST2 administration [ 21 ], ST2 gene deletion [ 31 ], or use of blocking ST2-specific antibody [ 22 ] resulted in decreased severity of disease. Adoptive cell transfer experiments showed that the inflammatory symptoms produced in the collagen model are mediated primarily through release of mast cell-derived cytokines [ 21 ]. However, the direct effect of IL-33 on OC differentiation and function had not been previously determined.

In this study, we demonstrate that IL-33 was equally potent in stimulating OC differentiation from human CD14 + monocytes as sRANKL (Fig. 1 e). Furthermore, the combined treatment of IL-33 and sRANKL led to additive formation of OCs (Fig. 2 a), raising the possibility that these two stimulants (IL-33 + sRANKL) act in concert under certain physiological conditions. The IL-33 effect was inhibited by anti-ST2 antibody, but not by OPG or anti-RANKL antibody (Fig. 2 b), suggesting that IL-33 induces the formation of OCs through ST2 receptors independently of RANKL/RANK in the cells. Studies with IL-1 have demonstrated that IL-1 itself cannot induce OC differentiation but can do so after ectopic overexpression of the IL-1RI in mBMMs in a RANKL/RANK-independent manner [ 32 ]. In addition, IL-1 did not induce the necessary expression of NFATc1 for osteoclastogenesis. In contrast, in our hands, IL-33 strongly stimulated expression of c-Fos and NFATc1 in CD14 + monocytes (Fig. 4 a). Although IL-1/IL-1R and IL-33/ST2 pathways share some pathways in common, it is plausible that additional mechanisms exist for OC differentiation that are unique to IL-33/ST2 activation.

We should note that we were unable to detect significant expression of the ST2 receptor in mBMMs and CD68 + cells in mouse synovial tissues (data not shown), as compared to human monocytes, mast cells, and T cells (Fig. 1 a, b) leaving the possibility that IL-33 may not exert the same osteoclastogenic activity in mBMMs. However, IL-33 could hypothetically stimulate OC differentiation indirectly through induction of RANKL in synovial cells and T cells in vivo by mast cell-derived cytokines such as IL-1, IL-6, and TNF-α. Consistent with this hypothesis, the level of RANKL mRNA in mouse joints is suppressed by administration of anti-ST2 antibody [ 22 ], suggesting that the IL-33/ST2 signal could increase the RANKL expression in the joints. As reported here, we find that expression of ST2 is also stimulated by RANKL in CD14 + monocytes (Fig. 4 a). This and previous results strongly suggest that IL-33 and RANKL can act cooperatively to stimulate osteoclastogenesis in vivo.

The RANKL/RANK complex recruits the adaptor molecule TRAF6, which is a critical adaptor protein for differentiation and function of OCs. The complex of RANK and TRAF6 leads to activation of MAP kinases and costimulatory signaling molecules, via DAP12 and FcRγ, including Syk and PLCγ [ 9 ]. In this study, IL-33 was found to stimulate TRAF6 expression and activate many of the same signaling molecules as RANKL including the TRAF6-mediated as well as the DAP12 and FcRγ-dependent costimulatory signals that are thought to be critical for the OC differentiation and bone-resorbing effects. These included JNK, p38 MAP kinase (Fig. 3 a), and the transcription factors AP-1 and NF-κB (Fig. 3 b). Although it is unclear whether RANKL acts via IRAK, IL-33 does activate IRAK which, in turn, activates the NF-κB pathway [ 13 ]. Therefore IRAK may participate in the regulation of OC differentiation for which NF-κB is essential. The activation of Syk, PLCγ2, and Gab2 by IL-33 has not been previously reported but as noted previously, the activation of Syk [ 33 ] and PLCγ2 [ 34 , 35 ] by RANKL occurs through recruitment of DAP12 and FcRγ [ 11 ]. We have yet to investigate whether an analogous mechanism exists for IL-33.

M-CSF is known to be a critical factor for the survival of OC progenitor cells by activating Akt and ERK1/2 [ 10 ]. We find that IL-33 also potentiates the activation of both these molecules in the presence of M-CSF (Fig. 3 a). This result suggests that M-CSF and IL-33 act cooperatively in regulating survival for differentiation of CD14 + monocytes to OCs.

The expressions of typical OC markers such as TRAF6, NFATc1, c-Fos, cathepsin K, the calcitonin receptor, and c-Src were significantly increased by a stimulation of IL-33 (Fig. 4 ), thus providing additional evidence that IL-33 stimulated differentiation of functional OCs. The fact that IL-33 is as effective as RANKL in inducing expression of NFATc1 (Fig. 4 b, c) is particularly notable in that ectopic overexpression of NFATc1 in bone marrow-derived monocytes is sufficient by itself to promote OC differentiation in RANKL-deficient monocytes [ 36 ].

Our results are consistent with the notion that IL-33 can stimulate the formation of functional OCs (Figs. 2 b, 5 ) without RANK/RANKL in human CD14 + monocytes. Interestingly, the expression of Syk is increased by the treatment with either IL-33 or sRANKL (Fig. 4 a, b). Syk plays an essential role in cytoskeletal rearrangement and bone-resorption capacity in RANKL-stimulated OCs [ 33 , 37 ]. Other IL-33-inducible markers that were indicative of progression to functional OCs included c-Src, which is thought to be the kinase responsible for phosphorylating DAP12 and FcRγ [ 33 ] and cathepsin K, a potent collagenase and papain-like protease that can cause bone resorption [ 37 ]. Of note, IL-33 also induced expression of its own receptor, ST2. The enhanced expression of ST2, along with ST2-related signaling molecules such as Syk and TRAF6, could signify a progression in sensitivity to IL-33 during differentiation and maturation of OCs (Fig. 4 ).

Although IL-33 and RANKL operate independently and through different receptors, both utilize common signaling pathways. The parallel increase in c-Src and Syk during the period of IL-33-driven OC differentiation (Fig. 4 ) might be another example of common pathways as both molecules are reported to form a signaling complex with αvβ3 integrin, which enables the phosphorylation of Syk by c-Src in RANKL-stimulated cells [ 38 ]. This ternary complex in along with DAP12 and FcRγ constitute a critical signaling component for the bone-resorbing capacity of OCs.

In summary, our results identify IL-33 as a novel regulator of differentiation of functional OCs that acts independently of RANKL/RANK in human CD14 + monocytes, through canonical IL1/ST2-mediated signaling pathways. Nevertheless, IL-33 and RANKL engage similar signaling pathways. Of particular note, IL-33 also stimulates the same pathway that is normally engaged by RANKL through the RANK co-receptor-adaptor complex, DAP12/FcRγ, and that enables activation of NFATc1 via Syk and PLCγ2. In addition to the similarities in signaling events, IL-33 appears to induce the same functional outputs as RANKL in stimulating OC differentiation and bone resorption. These results point to the possible participation of IL-33 in patients with RA where markedly elevated levels of IL-33 are present in joint synovial tissues [ 21 , 22 ]. The ability of IL-33 to stimulate OC formation and bone resorption could have therapeutic implications in inflammatory bone diseases.
