---
pmid: '18285836'
title: 'Pathogenicity of the BRCA1 missense variant M1775K is determined by the disruption
  of the BRCT phosphopeptide-binding pocket: a multi-modal approach.'
authors:
- Tischkowitz M
- Hamel N
- Carvalho MA
- Birrane G
- Soni A
- van Beers EH
- Joosse SA
- Wong N
- Novak D
- Quenneville LA
- Grist SA
- kConFab
- Nederlof PM
- Goldgar DE
- Tavtigian SV
- Monteiro AN
- Ladias JA
- Foulkes WD
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC3905962
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.13
---

# Pathogenicity of the BRCA1 missense variant M1775K is determined by the disruption of the BRCT phosphopeptide-binding pocket: a multi-modal approach.
**Authors:** Tischkowitz M, Hamel N, Carvalho MA, Birrane G, Soni A, van Beers EH, Joosse SA, Wong N, Novak D, Quenneville LA, Grist SA, kConFab, Nederlof PM, Goldgar DE, Tavtigian SV, Monteiro AN, Ladias JA, Foulkes WD
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2008.13](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2008.13)
**PMC:** [PMC3905962](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3905962/)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2008 Jul;16(7):820-32. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.13. Epub 2008
Feb  20.

Pathogenicity of the BRCA1 missense variant M1775K is determined by the 
disruption of the BRCT phosphopeptide-binding pocket: a multi-modal approach.

Tischkowitz M(1), Hamel N, Carvalho MA, Birrane G, Soni A, van Beers EH, Joosse 
SA, Wong N, Novak D, Quenneville LA, Grist SA; kConFab; Nederlof PM, Goldgar DE, 
Tavtigian SV, Monteiro AN, Ladias JA, Foulkes WD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, McGill University, Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

A number of germ-line mutations in the BRCA1 gene confer susceptibility to 
breast and ovarian cancer. However, it remains difficult to determine whether 
many single amino-acid (missense) changes in the BRCA1 protein that are 
frequently detected in the clinical setting are pathologic or not. Here, we used 
a combination of functional, crystallographic, biophysical, molecular and 
evolutionary techniques, and classical genetic segregation analysis to 
demonstrate that the BRCA1 missense variant M1775K is pathogenic. Functional 
assays in yeast and mammalian cells showed that the BRCA1 BRCT domains carrying 
the amino-acid change M1775K displayed markedly reduced transcriptional 
activity, indicating that this variant represents a deleterious mutation. 
Importantly, the M1775K mutation disrupted the phosphopeptide-binding pocket of 
the BRCA1 BRCT domains, thereby inhibiting the BRCA1 interaction with the 
proteins BRIP1 and CtIP, which are involved in DNA damage-induced checkpoint 
control. These results indicate that the integrity of the BRCT 
phosphopeptide-binding pocket is critical for the tumor suppression function of 
BRCA1. Moreover, this study demonstrates that multiple lines of evidence 
obtained from a combination of functional, structural, molecular and 
evolutionary techniques, and classical genetic segregation analysis are required 
to confirm the pathogenicity of rare variants of disease-susceptibility genes 
and obtain important insights into the underlying pathogenetic mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.13
PMCID: PMC3905962
PMID: 18285836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

A number of germ-line mutations in the BRCA1 gene confer susceptibility to breast and ovarian cancer. However, it remains difficult to determine whether many single amino-acid (missense) changes in the BRCA1 protein that are frequently detected in the clinical setting are pathologic or not. Here, we used a combination of functional, crystallographic, biophysical, molecular and evolutionary techniques, and classical genetic segregation analysis to demonstrate that the BRCA1 missense variant M1775K is pathogenic. Functional assays in yeast and mammalian cells showed that the BRCA1 BRCT domains carrying the amino-acid change M1775K displayed markedly reduced transcriptional activity, indicating that this variant represents a deleterious mutation. Importantly, the M1775K mutation disrupted the phosphopeptide-binding pocket of the BRCA1 BRCT domains, thereby inhibiting the BRCA1 interaction with the proteins BRIP1 and CtIP, which are involved in DNA damage-induced checkpoint control. These results indicate that the integrity of the BRCT phosphopeptide-binding pocket is critical for the tumor suppression function of BRCA1. Moreover, this study demonstrates that multiple lines of evidence obtained from a combination of functional, structural, molecular and evolutionary techniques, and classical genetic segregation analysis are required to confirm the pathogenicity of rare variants of disease-susceptibility genes and obtain important insights into the underlying pathogenetic mechanisms.

Introduction

The breast cancer susceptibility gene, BRCA1 , is one of the most studied genes in cancer research but despite the abundance of available data, new variants of unknown significance are regularly detected in clinical practice. These variants create serious management problems in the families concerned and are often frustrating to deal with. To date, there is no comprehensive functional assay available for BRCA1 mutations and much has been written about the approaches that can be used to classify variants, summarized in Goldgar et al. 1 In general, it is easier to conclude that a variant is non-pathogenic than pathogenic, a point illustrated by Chenevix-Trench et al 2 who studied 10 BRCA1 variants by a combination of methods and identified one as being definitely pathogenic.

In the present study, we investigated the rare variant M1775K, which occurs in the BRCT domains at the C terminus of BRCA1. The particular functional significance of the BRCA1 BRCT repeats has become increasingly recognized, 3 especially because they mediate interactions with proteins involved in cell cycle checkpoint control and double-stranded DNA repair, including BRIP1, a DNA helicase previously known as BACH1 4 that is also a breast cancer susceptibility protein, 5 and the co-repressor CtIP. 6 The M1775K variant was identified in two unrelated families of European ancestry with a history of breast cancer but its contribution to the pathogenesis of this disease has not been determined. Here, we used a combined approach encompassing a number of scientific disciplines to demonstrate that M1775K is pathogenic. Specifically, the M1775K mutation disrupts the phosphopeptide-binding pocket of the BRCA1 BRCT domains, thereby inhibiting the BRCA1 interaction with the proteins BRIP1 and CtIP. These results indicate that the integrity of the BRCT phosphopeptide-binding pocket is critical for the tumor suppression function of BRCA1. It is important to emphasize the need for a multi-disciplinary approach to determine pathogenicity, and this study, while focused on only one variant, argues for an in-depth characterization of all unclassified variants, particularly when their individual frequency is very low.

Results

The pedigrees of the two families in which the BRCA1 M1775K variant was identified are shown in Figure 1 and the tumor characteristics and available genotypes are listed in Table 2 . In family A, which is of Western European ancestry, the proband presented with a history of bilateral breast cancer at the ages of 43 and 44 years. The M1775K variant was identified in her and on further testing it was also present in her affected aunt, which made her affected deceased mother an obligate carrier. One of the daughters of AII.2 had medullary-type breast cancer at 33 years (genotype unknown) and a second daughter, AIII.2, had DCIS at 58 years. This daughter did not carry the M1775K variant. In family B, which is of Greek ancestry, the proband was diagnosed at age 26 years with Stage 1 breast cancer. Pathology revealed a high-grade, 1 cm infiltrating medullary carcinoma, which had negative estrogen, progesterone and HER2 receptor status. Genetic testing detected the M1775K variant in her and in addition she had a D1778N variant 3 codons downstream, which was not present in family A, indicating that the families are unrelated. The proband's father had no personal or family history of cancer and testing showed that he did not carry the M1775K or the D1778N variant, indicating that the variants were syntenic. On the basis of this, we assumed that the variant had been inherited from her mother, an assumption strengthened by the fact that she was diagnosed with Stage 2 breast cancer at age 46 years and metastatic colon cancer at age 65 years (both cancers were confirmed on pathology). The proband reported that both her maternal grandmother and her great aunt had breast and colon cancer in their 50s (unconfirmed). Two maternal aunts, unaffected at ages 61 and 69 years were both tested and found not to carry the M1775K variant.

Discussion

By using a combination of functional, structural, molecular and evolutionary techniques and classical genetic segregation analysis, we have demonstrated that the BRCA1 M1775K variant is highly likely to be pathogenic. The combination of sequence analysis-based prior probability and segregation analysis-based likelihood ratio gave a strong indication that M1775K is pathogenic, but was not conclusive. Addition of the histopathology-based likelihood ratio yields a convincing posterior probability (greater than 100:1). However, histopathological characteristics have only recently been added to the integrated likelihood approach 2 and therefore we felt it important to confirm pathogenicity by other methods. In this respect, the LOH studies may add supporting evidence, although almost all studies where BRCA1 -related tumors were shown to lose the wild-type allele 36 – 38 have been carried out on samples with truncating BRCA1 mutations and the same may not be true for missense mutations.

BRCA1 -related tumors in general show more genomic aberrations than sporadic tumors, and also show specific chromosomal gains and losses. 11 , 28 , 29 The M1775K tumor analyzed here shows clearly abundant chromosomal changes, many of which comprise of small regions on different chromosomes, suggesting many intra-chromosomal breaks.

The shrunken centroids classifier used for BRCA1 class prediction shows high specificity; no false-positive and false-negative calls were observed on 10 proven BRCA1 -related tumors and 16 sporadic control tumors that were independent of the training sets. 28 The M1775K tumor showed a relatively low score for a BRCA1 -related tumor and is just outside the 95% reference interval for BRCA1 , possibly due to the noise relating to DNA quality. However, it is classified with a positive score and predicted to be BRCA1 -like. As can be seen in Figure 2b , the tumor does show most of the characteristic BRCA1 aberrations.

The functional assay based on the transcriptional activity of the C-terminal region of BRCA1 functions as a monitor of the integrity of the BRCT domains and provides a simple, standardized and validated test for unclassified variants that are located in the regions encompassed by the assay. 16 , 18 , 19 , 39 In addition, because a large set of variants can be tested and results compared across several experiments (provided internal controls are used) it is also a powerful way to cross-validate other methods such as computation prediction models. 40 – 42 It is interesting to note that a recently described computation prediction model correctly predicted the structural changes and the functional impact of the M1775K change. 40 However, one should use caution when interpreting results from functional assays in the absence of other supporting data. For example, specific surface changes that do not cause major changes in the fold but disrupt specific binding sites not required for the activity of BRCA1 in recruiting the RNA polymerase II holoenzyme might be missed by the assay. Further validation is still needed to determine whether such variants exist, and how frequent they are with clear implications for the specificity of the assay. Moreover, while the BRCA1 M1775R variant has been described as pathogenic, 30 , 31 this in itself is not sufficient to class M1775K as pathogenic as it is possible for different amino-acid changes at the same position to be benign or pathogenic, for example, the BRCA1 I15T variant prevents interaction with the E2 ubiquitin conjugating enzyme UbcH5a, whereas BRCA1 I15L has no effect. 43

The BRCA1 region spanning residues 1646–1859 folds into two tandem domains (BRCT1 and BRCT2), which interact in a phosphorylation-dependent manner with proteins involved in DNA damage-induced checkpoint control, including BRIP1 4 and CtIP. 6 The present M1775K structure represents the third crystal structure (after M1775R and V1809F 44 ) of a BRCA1 BRCT mutant and reveals the mechanism underlying its pathogenicity at the atomic level. It was previously shown that the BRCA1 BRCT mutant M1775R disrupts the BRCA1 interaction with BRIP1 and CtIP through steric interference between the guanidino group of Arg1775 and the Phe +3 of the ligand. 31 , 34 It, therefore, appears that the substituted Lys1775 and Arg1775 side chains directly block access of the Phe +3 to pocket P 2 , thereby inhibiting the BRCA1 interaction with BRIP1, 34 , 35 , 45 CtIP 46 and likely other proteins that interact with the P 1 and P 2 pockets of the BRCT repeats through a similar mechanism, leading to defects in the double-strand DNA repair 47 and transactivation functions of BRCA1. 48 Taken together, these results indicate that the integrity of the BRCT phosphopeptide-binding pocket is required for the tumor suppression function of BRCA1.

Nucleotide substitutions in disease susceptibility genes that lead to a single amino-acid change pose a real challenge in risk assessment. Unlike changes that clearly affect protein structure and where impact on function can be inferred, the consequences on protein activity resulting from missense changes are difficult to determine. The large number of missense variants detected to date in BRCA1 (Breast Cancer Information Core database, http://research.nhgri.nih.gov/bic/ ) constitutes a significant hurdle to identify individuals at high risk for breast and ovarian cancer. All of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 missense substitutions with frequency >1% in the general population have been classified as neutral or of little clinical importance. Therefore, all of the potentially high risk, clinically important missense substitutions are rare, making direct epidemiological studies difficult to conduct. To determine whether a certain unclassified variant is likely to be deleterious or neutral, it is necessary to combine methods from different disciplines as shown here. Some of these methods may only be applicable to certain domains of the protein and at present there is no standardized protocol or scoring system to weigh each method in deciding whether a variant is pathogenic or not. Given the number of different complementary assays used, the work described here might be considered as the ‘gold standard’ in determining pathogenicity, although given the resource-intense nature of the work and the destabilizing effects on the BRCT fold by certain missense mutations, it may not be feasible to consider such a comprehensive approach for each variant identified in the clinic.
