---
pmid: '24882218'
title: Unanchored K48-linked polyubiquitin synthesized by the E3-ubiquitin ligase
  TRIM6 stimulates the interferon-IKKε kinase-mediated antiviral response.
authors:
- Rajsbaum R
- Versteeg GA
- Schmid S
- Maestre AM
- Belicha-Villanueva A
- Martínez-Romero C
- Patel JR
- Morrison J
- Pisanelli G
- Miorin L
- Laurent-Rolle M
- Moulton HM
- Stein DA
- Fernandez-Sesma A
- tenOever BR
- García-Sastre A
journal: Immunity
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4114019
doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.04.018
---

# Unanchored K48-linked polyubiquitin synthesized by the E3-ubiquitin ligase TRIM6 stimulates the interferon-IKKε kinase-mediated antiviral response.
**Authors:** Rajsbaum R, Versteeg GA, Schmid S, Maestre AM, Belicha-Villanueva A, Martínez-Romero C, Patel JR, Morrison J, Pisanelli G, Miorin L, Laurent-Rolle M, Moulton HM, Stein DA, Fernandez-Sesma A, tenOever BR, García-Sastre A
**Journal:** Immunity (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.immuni.2014.04.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2014.04.018)
**PMC:** [PMC4114019](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4114019/)

## Abstract

1. Immunity. 2014 Jun 19;40(6):880-95. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.04.018. Epub
2014  May 29.

Unanchored K48-linked polyubiquitin synthesized by the E3-ubiquitin ligase TRIM6 
stimulates the interferon-IKKε kinase-mediated antiviral response.

Rajsbaum R(1), Versteeg GA(2), Schmid S(3), Maestre AM(3), Belicha-Villanueva 
A(1), Martínez-Romero C(1), Patel JR(1), Morrison J(1), Pisanelli G(4), Miorin 
L(1), Laurent-Rolle M(1), Moulton HM(5), Stein DA(5), Fernandez-Sesma A(3), 
tenOever BR(1), García-Sastre A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One 
Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA; Global Health and Emerging 
Pathogens Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. 
Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One 
Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA; Global Health and Emerging 
Pathogens Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. 
Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA; Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University of 
Vienna, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9/4, 1030 Vienna, Austria.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One 
Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One 
Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA; Global Health and Emerging 
Pathogens Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. 
Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Veterinary Medicine and 
Animal Production, University of Naples Federico II, Via Federico Delpino 1, 
80137 Naples, Italy.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Oregon 
State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One 
Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA; Global Health and Emerging 
Pathogens Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. 
Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Medicine, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA. 
Electronic address: adolfo.garcia-sastre@mssm.edu.

Type I interferons (IFN-I) are essential antiviral cytokines produced upon 
microbial infection. IFN-I elicits this activity through the upregulation of 
hundreds of IFN-I-stimulated genes (ISGs). The full breadth of ISG induction 
demands activation of a number of cellular factors including the IκB kinase 
epsilon (IKKε). However, the mechanism of IKKε activation upon IFN receptor 
signaling has remained elusive. Here we show that TRIM6, a member of the 
E3-ubiquitin ligase tripartite motif (TRIM) family of proteins, interacted with 
IKKε and promoted induction of IKKε-dependent ISGs. TRIM6 and the E2-ubiquitin 
conjugase UbE2K cooperated in the synthesis of unanchored K48-linked 
polyubiquitin chains, which activated IKKε for subsequent STAT1 phosphorylation. 
Our work attributes a previously unrecognized activating role of K48-linked 
unanchored polyubiquitin chains in kinase activation and identifies the 
UbE2K-TRIM6-ubiquitin axis as critical for IFN signaling and antiviral response.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.04.018
PMCID: PMC4114019
PMID: 24882218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

Innate immune signaling pathways are activated when pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) contained in microbial products are recognized by host cell pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) such as Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs) ( Medzhitov et al., 1997 ; Meylan et al., 2006 ). Activation of these pathways ultimately results in production of type I interferons (IFN-I) and other cytokines essential for an effective anti-microbial response ( Akira et al., 2006 ). Different adaptor proteins function to transmit downstream signals converging at the point of the IκB (IKK) and IKK-related kinases ( Kawai et al., 2005 ; Yamamoto et al., 2003 ). The IKK-related kinases (TBK1 and IKKε) phosphorylate the transcription factors IRF3 and IRF7 required for type I IFN production ( Hemmi et al., 2004 ; Sharma et al., 2003 ).

IFN-I receptor-mediated signaling triggers phosphorylation of signal transducers and activators of transcription 1 (STAT1) and STAT2. Together STAT1, STAT2, and a third transcription factor, IRF9, form the Interferon Stimulated Gene Factor 3 (ISGF3) complex, which is essential for induction of many IFN stimulated genes (ISGs) ( Platanias, 2005 ). The tyrosine kinases JAK1 and TYK2 are critical for phosphorylation of tyrosine 701 (Y701) on STAT1 and its subsequent induction of a broad range of ISGs ( Shuai et al., 1993 ). In addition to tyrosine phosphorylation, S708 has also been reported to modulate the transcriptional potential of STAT1 and is required for establishing an effective antiviral state ( Tenoever et al., 2007 ). S708 is phosphorylated by IKKε during IFN signaling, but the mechanism by how IKKε becomes activated has remained elusive ( Tenoever et al., 2007 ).

Ubiquitination of proteins is an important post-translational covalent modification process which has been thoroughly demonstrated to regulate signaling pathways in immune regulation and cytokine production ( Jiang and Chen, 2012 ). Ubiquitin (Ub), a 76 amino acid protein, has seven lysines, each of which can be conjugated by another Ub to form a poly-Ub chain ( Trempe, 2011 ). It is generally accepted that proteins covalently attached to poly-Ub chains linked through lysine 48 (K48) of Ub are targeted for degradation by the proteasome. Conversely, protein modification with K63-linked poly-Ub chains has non-proteolytic activating functions ( Chen and Sun, 2009 ).

The TRIM family of proteins, which are characterized by the presence of a RING, B box and a coiled-coil domain, has been implicated in innate immune signaling pathways by acting as E3-Ub ligases ( Rajsbaum et al., 2014 ). Recently, we have shown that an unprecedented large number of TRIMs positively regulates innate immune responses ( Versteeg et al., 2013 ), however, only a limited number of these TRIMs that act as positive regulators have been characterized in detail. In this study we report that TRIM6 together with the E2 Ub conjugase UbE2K synthetizes unanchored K48-linked poly-Ub chains which activate IKKε to phosphorylate STAT1 S708, ultimately resulting in the induction of a subset of ISGs essential for the antiviral response in vitro and in vivo .

Discussion

In this study we demonstrate that the Ub E3 ligase TRIM6 is required for efficient IFN-I signaling and establishment of an antiviral state by synthesis of K48-linked unanchored poly-Ub chains, which activate IKKε for STAT1 phosphorylation. Our findings indicate that these Ub chains play a role in both whole cell context and in vivo . This is supported by four lines of evidence: i) expression of IsoT, which specifically degrades unanchored Ub, reduced IFN-mediated ISG induction in cells, ii) knockdown of the E2-Ub ligase Ube2K, which is known to synthesize K48-linked poly-Ub chains ( Chen and Pickart, 1990 ; Wilson et al., 2011 ), attenuated ISG expression upon IFN stimulation, iii) poly-Ub chains interact with IKKε in mouse lungs during viral infection in an IFN-I-dependent manner and iv) the formation of IKKε-Ub complexes is reduced in TRIM6 si mouse lungs upon viral infection.

Importantly, TRIM6 si not only impaired IFN signaling, but also impaired IFNβ production upon TLRs and RLRs stimulation in primary human DCs and human cell lines, although this was not the case in the lungs of IAV-infected mice. One possible explanation for this discrepancy could be differences in TRIM6 function in human and mouse. Alternatively, TRIM6 may have cell type specific effects or may act at multiple levels in signaling pathways of the IFN-I system. Moreover, increased IFN production in TRIM6 si mice may be a reflection of increased viral replication as a result of diminished antiviral response. In addition, any defect on IFN production in TRIM6 si cells in the lung may have been obscured by IFN produced from other cells in the lung that were not subject to TRIM6 si , as for example, infiltrating cells.

Although it is clear that IKKε phosphorylates IRF3 and IRF7 for IFN induction ( Sharma et al., 2003 ), production of IFN-I was not reduced in Ikbke -/- mice upon IAV infection ( Tenoever et al., 2007 ). However, studies have suggested that TBK-1 and IKKε play a redundant role in IFN induction ( Hemmi et al., 2004 ). Therefore it is still plausible that TRIM6 may also play a role by activating IKKε for IFNβ production in specific cell types, or under specific conditions. Alternatively, TRIM6 may have other signaling partners in addition to IKKε for IFN induction, as it has been shown for other TRIMs ( Rajsbaum et al., 2014 ). The specific role of TRIM6 in the IFNβ induction pathway will need to be determined in future studies.

In our immunofluorescence experiments, TRIM6, IKKε and Ub co-localized in punctate cytoplasmic bodies. These structures, which have also been observed for other TRIMs, seem to be independent sub-cellular compartments since they do not co-localize with any markers for known cellular structures ( Reymond et al., 2001 ). As we observed a dramatic increase in Ub staining in these TRIM6-containing bodies, we speculate that these structures may be “Ub factories” whereto other target proteins -such as IKKε- can be recruited during signaling. These structures required an intact TRIM6 coiled-coil region (data not shown, and ( Reymond et al., 2001 )), and formation of poly-Ub chains by TRIM6, suggesting that oligomerization is essential for their assembly. These sub-cellular structures may be an important compartmentalization mechanism in the cell.

Our data suggest that TRIM6 could be activated upon IFN stimulation by the JAK1 kinase by binding and phosphorylating TRIM6. However, TRIM6 activation may also involve ubiquitination by a yet unidentified E3-ligase since covalent K63-linked ubiquitination of both WT TRIM6 and its E3 ligase C15A mutant was detected.

In conclusion, our study identified TRIM6, UbE2K and K48-linked poly-Ub chains as novel players critical for the IKKε branch of the IFN-I signaling pathway and subsequent establishment of a protective antiviral response. Our study provides a framework for future work on the TRIM family of proteins, as well as the mechanism of kinase activation by unanchored K48-linked poly-Ub chains related to antiviral immunity. Wheras we report a unique function of unanchored K48-poly-Ub in kinase activation, it might be possible that these molecules also participate in other signaling process, as is the case for unanchored K63-poly-Ub ( Pertel et al., 2011 ; Xia et al., 2009 ; Zeng et al., 2010 ). Free poly-Ub is therefore emerging as a secondary messenger that participates in regulation of signaling and further studies are needed to fully elucidate cellular processes that are controlled by the synthesis of unanchored Ub chains.
