---
pmid: '7568005'
title: Critical role of the interleukin 2 (IL-2) receptor gamma-chain-associated Jak3
  in the IL-2-induced c-fos and c-myc, but not bcl-2, gene induction.
authors:
- Kawahara A
- Minami Y
- Miyazaki T
- Ihle JN
- Taniguchi T
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1995'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC41039
doi: 10.1073/pnas.92.19.8724
---

# Critical role of the interleukin 2 (IL-2) receptor gamma-chain-associated Jak3 in the IL-2-induced c-fos and c-myc, but not bcl-2, gene induction.
**Authors:** Kawahara A, Minami Y, Miyazaki T, Ihle JN, Taniguchi T
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.92.19.8724](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.92.19.8724)
**PMC:** [PMC41039](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC41039/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Sep 12;92(19):8724-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.92.19.8724.

Critical role of the interleukin 2 (IL-2) receptor gamma-chain-associated Jak3 
in the IL-2-induced c-fos and c-myc, but not bcl-2, gene induction.

Kawahara A(1), Minami Y, Miyazaki T, Ihle JN, Taniguchi T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Japan.

The interleukin 2 receptor (IL-2R) consists of three subunits, the IL-2R alpha, 
IL-2R beta c, and IL-2R gamma c chains. Two Janus family protein tyrosine 
kinases (PTKs), Jak1 and Jak3, were shown to associate with IL-2R beta c and 
IL-2R gamma c, respectively, and their PTK activities are increased after IL-2 
stimulation. A Jak3 mutant with truncation of the C-terminal PTK domain lacks 
its intrinsic kinase activity but can still associate with IL-2R gamma c. In a 
hematopoietic cell line, F7, that responds to either IL-2 or IL-3, 
overexpression of this Jak3 mutant results in selective inhibition of the 
IL-2-induced activation of Jak1/Jak3 PTKs and of cell proliferation. Of the 
three target nuclear protooncogenes of the IL-2 signaling, c-fos and c-myc 
genes, but not the bcl-2 gene, were found to be impaired. On the other hand, 
overexpression of the dominant negative form of the IL-2R gamma c chain, which 
lacks most of its cytoplasmic domain, in F7 cells resulted in the inhibition of 
all three protooncogenes. These results provide a further molecular basis for 
the critical role of Jak3 in IL-2 signaling and also suggest a Jak 
PTK-independent signaling pathway(s) for the bcl-2 gene induction by IL-2R.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.92.19.8724
PMCID: PMC41039
PMID: 7568005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The interleukin 2 receptor (IL-2R) consists of three subunits, the IL-2R alpha, IL-2R beta c, and IL-2R gamma c chains. Two Janus family protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs), Jak1 and Jak3, were shown to associate with IL-2R beta c and IL-2R gamma c, respectively, and their PTK activities are increased after IL-2 stimulation. A Jak3 mutant with truncation of the C-terminal PTK domain lacks its intrinsic kinase activity but can still associate with IL-2R gamma c. In a hematopoietic cell line, F7, that responds to either IL-2 or IL-3, overexpression of this Jak3 mutant results in selective inhibition of the IL-2-induced activation of Jak1/Jak3 PTKs and of cell proliferation. Of the three target nuclear protooncogenes of the IL-2 signaling, c-fos and c-myc genes, but not the bcl-2 gene, were found to be impaired. On the other hand, overexpression of the dominant negative form of the IL-2R gamma c chain, which lacks most of its cytoplasmic domain, in F7 cells resulted in the inhibition of all three protooncogenes. These results provide a further molecular basis for the critical role of Jak3 in IL-2 signaling and also suggest a Jak PTK-independent signaling pathway(s) for the bcl-2 gene induction by IL-2R.
