---
pmid: '12050115'
title: Phosphorylation of the mitotic regulator Pds1/securin by Cdc28 is required
  for efficient nuclear localization of Esp1/separase.
authors:
- Agarwal R
- Cohen-Fix O
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2002'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC186323
doi: 10.1101/gad.971402
---

# Phosphorylation of the mitotic regulator Pds1/securin by Cdc28 is required for efficient nuclear localization of Esp1/separase.
**Authors:** Agarwal R, Cohen-Fix O
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.971402](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.971402)
**PMC:** [PMC186323](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC186323/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2002 Jun 1;16(11):1371-82. doi: 10.1101/gad.971402.

Phosphorylation of the mitotic regulator Pds1/securin by Cdc28 is required for 
efficient nuclear localization of Esp1/separase.

Agarwal R(1), Cohen-Fix O.

Author information:
(1)The Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Sister chromatid separation at the metaphase-to-anaphase transition is induced 
by the proteolytic cleavage of one of the cohesin complex subunits. This process 
is mediated by a conserved protease called separase. Separase is associated with 
its inhibitor, securin, until the time of anaphase initiation, when securin is 
degraded in an anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C)-dependent manner. In 
budding yeast securin/Pds1 not only inhibits separase/Esp1, but also promotes 
its nuclear localization. The molecular mechanism and regulation of this nuclear 
targeting are presently unknown. Here we show that Pds1 is a substrate of the 
cyclin-dependent kinase Cdc28. Phosphorylation of Pds1 by Cdc28 is important for 
efficient binding of Pds1 to Esp1 and for promoting the nuclear localization of 
Esp1. Our results uncover a previously unknown mechanism for regulating the 
Pds1-Esp1 interaction and shed light on a novel role for Cdc28 in promoting the 
metaphase-to-anaphase transition in budding yeast.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.971402
PMCID: PMC186323
PMID: 12050115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Sister chromatid separation at the metaphase-to-anaphase transition is induced by the proteolytic cleavage of one of the cohesin complex subunits. This process is mediated by a conserved protease called separase. Separase is associated with its inhibitor, securin, until the time of anaphase initiation, when securin is degraded in an anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C)-dependent manner. In budding yeast securin/Pds1 not only inhibits separase/Esp1, but also promotes its nuclear localization. The molecular mechanism and regulation of this nuclear targeting are presently unknown. Here we show that Pds1 is a substrate of the cyclin-dependent kinase Cdc28. Phosphorylation of Pds1 by Cdc28 is important for efficient binding of Pds1 to Esp1 and for promoting the nuclear localization of Esp1. Our results uncover a previously unknown mechanism for regulating the Pds1–Esp1 interaction and shed light on a novel role for Cdc28 in promoting the metaphase-to-anaphase transition in budding yeast.

Discussion

Cell cycle progression is the net result of regulatory mechanisms that drive the cell cycle and those that exert an inhibitory effect. The latter are often required to ensure that late cell cycle events are initiated only after early ones have been successfully completed. During mitosis, it is imperative that sister chromatids separate only after all duplicated chromosomes have formed bipolar spindle attachments. Because sister chromatid separation is driven by the proteolytic cleavage of one of the cohesin complex subunits, it is conceivable that the protease that drives this process, separase, would be subjected to multiple levels of regulation. In budding yeast, the activity of the Esp1/separase is inhibited by Pds1/securin, making Pds1 a target for numerous regulatory mechanisms that influence the timing of anaphase initiation. These include the spindle checkpoint pathway, acting via the inhibition of APC/C activity ( Fang et al. 1998 ; Wassmann and Benezra 1998 ), and the DNA damage checkpoint pathway, stabilizing Pds1 through Chk1-mediated phosphorylation ( Wang et al. 2001 ). Pds1 not only inhibits Esp1 but also acts as an Esp1 activator by driving its nuclear accumulation ( Jensen et al. 2001 ). Despite the diverse roles played by Pds1 in mitotic regulation, little is known about the molecular mechanism of its action.

Mitotic CDKs are known to be required for progression through mitosis. In budding yeast, Clb–Cdc28 complexes are necessary for spindle formation and regulation of the APC/C ( Richardson et al. 1992 ; Irniger et al. 1995 ; Amon 1997 ). In this study we present several lines of evidence suggesting that Pds1 is a target of Cdc28: (1) Pds1 was phosphorylated in vitro by immunopurified wild-type Cdc28. This phosphorylation was specific to Cdc28, because mutant forms of Cdc28 impaired in their catalytic activity did not promote Pds1 phosphorylation. (2) The phosphorylation of Pds1 in vivo was abolished by mutations or conditions that inactivated Cdc28. These included a temperature-sensitive allele of CDC28, cdc28-13 , and a chemically repressible Cdc28 derivative, Cdc28-as1. (3) Mutagenesis of three of the Cdc28 consensus sites in Pds1 altered the mobility of Pds1 as detected by SDS-PAGE and abolished the slow-migrating Pds1 form, similar to the change in mobility observed after phosphatase treatment. Taken together, our data suggest that Pds1 is a bona fide Cdc28 substrate.

The Cdc28-dependent phosphorylation of Pds1 occurred at any phase of the cell cycle in which Pds1 was present. Given that not all phosphorylations may result in a mobility shift, the fraction of Pds1 molecules that is phosphorylated by Cdc28 at any given time and the number of Cdc28 phosphorylation sites occupied per molecule are currently unknown. Nonetheless, Cdc28-mediated phosphorylation appears to be critical for the ability to interact efficiently with Esp1 and to promote the nuclear localization of Esp1. This conclusion is based on the following observations: (1) Pds1-38, in which three Cdc28 consensus phosphorylation sites at the C terminus of Pds1 were converted to alanines, had a significantly reduced affinity for Esp1 at the permissive temperature and was unable to promote the nuclear localization of Esp1 at elevated temperatures. (2) Dephosphorylation of in vivo phosphorylated Pds1 reduced its ability to interact with Esp1 in vitro. (3) The ability of high levels of Pds1 to drive Esp1 into the nucleus in G 1 was dependent on Cdc28 activity. Our results also show that phosphorylation by Cdc28 is not required for the nuclear localization of Pds1 itself. Moreover, phosphorylation at Ser 277, Ser 292, and possibly Thr 304 is not essential for the role of Pds1 as a mitotic inhibitor, as the pds1-38 mutant strain, unlike the pds1Δ strain, was not sensitive to microtubule depolymerizing drugs. The ability of Pds1-38 to inhibit mitotic progression suggests that it is still capable of binding to Esp1, albeit at much a lower affinity. The difference between the ability to promote the nuclear localization of Esp1 and to inhibit mitotic progression may lie in the different cellular compartments in which these functions take place. Inhibition of mitotic progression is likely to take place in the nucleus, where the levels of Pds1-38, or wild-type Pds1, are high and therefore low-affinity interactions may be compensated by the overall high Pds1-38 concentration. In contrast, the Pds1–Esp1 interaction that is required to promote the nuclear localization of Esp1 may take place in the cytoplasm, where Pds1-38 levels are exceedingly low, and low-affinity interactions may be insufficient to drive Esp1 into the nucleus. Moreover, Pds1 is likely to reside in the cytoplasm for only a short period of time, whereas in the nucleus there is more opportunity to maintain a Pds1–Esp1 interaction. At present we do not know why the defect in Esp1 nuclear localization in the pds1-38 strain is detected only at elevated temperatures. It is possible that the affinity between Pds1-38 and Esp1 is further reduced at the elevated temperature and that the low-affinity state, detected by the immunoprecipitation assay at 23°C, is sufficient to promote nuclear accumulation at low but not high temperatures.

Our results suggest that following Pds1 phosphorylation by Cdc28, Pds1 associates with Esp1 and promotes its nuclear accumulation (Fig. 7 ). This mechanism ensures that prior to anaphase, nuclear Esp1 will be inactive because of its association with Pds1, and only after Pds1 inactivation, either by APC/C-mediated degradation or by the activity of a putative phosphatase (see below), will Esp1 become active. Interestingly, the phosphorylation of securins by mitotic CDKs appears to be conserved, as the human securin homolog of Pds1, PTTG, has been shown to be phosphorylated by Cdc2 ( Ramos-Morales et al. 2000 ). In this case the CDK-dependent phosphorylation of securin is unlikely to be required for the nuclear localization of separase due to nuclear envelope break-down upon mitotic entry, but a requirement for targeting to a subnuclear structure (e.g., chromatin) is still possible. In both humans and Drosophila , the loss of securin function is accompanied by reduced separase activity, suggesting that the involvement of securin in separase activation is conserved. Whether the CDK-dependent phosphorylation is required for the positive function of securin in Drosophila and humans remains to be determined.

The dependence of the Pds1–Esp1 interaction on Cdc28-mediated phosphorylation suggests that the association between the two proteins could be dissolved not only by APC/C-mediated degradation of Pds1 but also by the action of an as yet unidentified phosphatase (Fig. 7 ). A possible phosphatase is the Cdc14 protein that was shown to remove Cdc28-mediated phosphorylation from the Cdh1, Sic1, and Swi5 proteins ( Jaspersen et al. 1999 ), and overexpression of Cdc14 resulted in the disappearance of the slower-migrating Pds1 form ( Visintin et al. 1998 ). At the time, the nature of this form was not known, but the results presented here suggest that this effect could be caused by the dephosphorylation of Pds1. Why would a cell need two mechanisms to counteract Pds1's inhibitory grip on Esp1? Having redundant mechanisms for regulating key cell cycle transitions is not uncommon. For example, Clb–Cdc28 inactivation at the exit from mitosis occurs via at least two pathways, the APC/C Cdh1 -dependent degradation of the mitotic cyclins and the Sic1-dependent inhibition of Clb–Cdc28 activity ( Schwab et al. 1997 ; Visintin et al. 1998 ). In addition, there may be a pool of Esp1-bound phosphorylated Pds1 that is resistant to APC/C Cdc20 -mediated degradation and for which dephosphorylation may be the only way to release Esp1. Tinker-Kulberg and Morgan (1999) proposed a role for Esp1 at the exit of mitosis, and at that late cell cycle stage, when the nuclear Pds1 levels are low, dephosphorylation may be an effective way to free Esp1. Dephosphorylation may also render Pds1 more susceptible to degradation, either because dephosphorylated Pds1 is a better substrate for the APC/C or simply because by increasing the Pds1–Esp1 dissociation rate Pds1 may become more accessible to the ubiquitination machinery. Finally, it has been shown recently that Esp1 regulates the early release of Cdc14 from the nucleolus ( Stegmeier et al. 2002 ). It is tempting to speculate that if Cdc14 is indeed the Pds1 phosphatase there may be a positive feedback loop where released Cdc14 dephosphorylates Pds1. As the nuclear concentrations of Pds1 drop owing to APC/C activity, dephosphorylation could play a significant role in dissociating the Esp1–Pds1 complex, thereby further activating Esp1 and allowing more Cdc14 to be released from the nucleolus. Thus, the Cdc28-mediated phosphorylation of Pds1 adds another layer of complexity to the regulation of mitotic progression.
