---
pmid: '20820192'
title: BRCA1 affects global DNA methylation through regulation of DNMT1.
authors:
- Shukla V
- Coumoul X
- Lahusen T
- Wang RH
- Xu X
- Vassilopoulos A
- Xiao C
- Lee MH
- Man YG
- Ouchi M
- Ouchi T
- Deng CX
journal: Cell Res
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC9423198
doi: 10.1038/cr.2010.128
---

# BRCA1 affects global DNA methylation through regulation of DNMT1.
**Authors:** Shukla V, Coumoul X, Lahusen T, Wang RH, Xu X, Vassilopoulos A, Xiao C, Lee MH, Man YG, Ouchi M, Ouchi T, Deng CX
**Journal:** Cell Res (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/cr.2010.128](https://doi.org/10.1038/cr.2010.128)
**PMC:** [PMC9423198](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9423198/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Res. 2010 Nov;20(11):1201-15. doi: 10.1038/cr.2010.128. Epub 2010 Sep 7.

BRCA1 affects global DNA methylation through regulation of DNMT1.

Shukla V(1), Coumoul X, Lahusen T, Wang RH, Xu X, Vassilopoulos A, Xiao C, Lee 
MH, Man YG, Ouchi M, Ouchi T, Deng CX.

Author information:
(1)Genetics of Development and Disease Branch, 10/9N105, National Institute of 
Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Global DNA hypomethylation at CpG islands coupled with local hypermethylation is 
a hallmark for breast cancer, yet the mechanism underlying this change remains 
elusive. In this study, we showed that DNMT1, which encodes a methylation 
maintenance enzyme, is a transcriptional target of BRCA1. BRCA1 binds to the 
promoter of the DNMT1 gene through a potential OCT1 site and the binding is 
required for maintaining a transcriptional active configuration of the promoter 
in both mouse and human cells. We further demonstrated that impaired function of 
BRCA1 leads to global DNA hypomethylation, loss of genomic imprinting, and an 
open chromatin configuration in several types of tissues examined in a BRCA1 
mutant mouse model at premaligant stages. BRCA1 deficiency is also associated 
with significantly increased expression levels of several protooncogenes, 
including c-Fos, Ha-Ras, and c-Myc, with a higher expression in tumors, while 
premalignant mammary epithelial cells displayed an intermediate state between 
tumors and controls. In human clinical samples, reduced expression of BRCA1 
correlates with decreased levels of DNMT1, and reduced methylation of CpG 
islands. Thus, BRCA1 prevents global DNA hypomethylation through positively 
regulating DNMT1 expression, and this provides one of mechanisms for 
BRCA1-associated breast cancer formation.

DOI: 10.1038/cr.2010.128
PMCID: PMC9423198
PMID: 20820192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Global DNA hypomethylation at CpG islands coupled with local hypermethylation is a hallmark for breast cancer, yet the mechanism underlying this change remains elusive. In this study, we showed that DNMT1, which encodes a methylation maintenance enzyme, is a transcriptional target of BRCA1. BRCA1 binds to the promoter of the DNMT1 gene through a potential OCT1 site and the binding is required for maintaining a transcriptional active configuration of the promoter in both mouse and human cells. We further demonstrated that impaired function of BRCA1 leads to global DNA hypomethylation, loss of genomic imprinting, and an open chromatin configuration in several types of tissues examined in a BRCA1 mutant mouse model at premaligant stages. BRCA1 deficiency is also associated with significantly increased expression levels of several protooncogenes, including c-Fos, Ha-Ras, and c-Myc, with a higher expression in tumors, while premalignant mammary epithelial cells displayed an intermediate state between tumors and controls. In human clinical samples, reduced expression of BRCA1 correlates with decreased levels of DNMT1, and reduced methylation of CpG islands. Thus, BRCA1 prevents global DNA hypomethylation through positively regulating DNMT1 expression, and this provides one of mechanisms for BRCA1-associated breast cancer formation.

Introduction

DNA methylation is an epigenetic change that occurs in cells by adding a methyl group (CH3) to the 5′ position of cytidyl residues in the dinucleotide sequence CpG. Hypomethylation is usually associated with increased gene expression while hypermethylation is linked to gene silencing [ 1 – 4 ]. It has been shown that global DNA hypomethylation is increased in breast cancer, playing an important role in late stages of cancer development, while local promoter hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes may be responsible for early stages of breast cancer [ 2 , 4 – 6 ]. It was also reported that hypomethylation of juxtacentromeric satellite DNA and global DNA hypomethylation were common even in an early stage (i.e. stage-1) of breast cancer, arguing that hypomethylation can be an early event in breast carcinogenesis [ 7 ]. DNA is methylated by a group of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs), including DNMT1, DNMT3a, DNMT3b, and DNMT3L, while DNMT2 is an inactivated isoform [ 3 , 4 , 8 ]. DNMT1 is also called methylation maintenance enzyme. At each cell division, DNMT1 completes the methylation pattern of each nascent replicating DNA strand, allowing maintenance of complete DNA methylation originally hemi-methylated on the template strand. DNMT3a and DNTM3b act as de novo methyltransferases and methylate unmethylated DNA. They are associated with the replication fork in late S phase during the replication of constitutive heterochromatin. DNMT3L is expressed during gametogenesis and establishes maternal genomic imprinting [ 3 , 8 ]. Despite the important roles of DNMTs in breast cancer formation, it is poorly understood how expression of these factors is regulated.

Functions of DNMTs have been extensively studied in mice by using gene targeting. DNMT1-deficient mice lose about 90% of their DNA methylation and die early in embryogenesis [ 9 ]. Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells deficient for DNMT1 or for both DNMT3a and DNMT3b have dramatically elongated telomeres compared with wild-type controls, highlighting a role for DNA methylation in maintaining telomere integrity [ 10 ]. Hypomorphic DNMT1 activity has been related to aggressive T-cell lymphomas in a mouse model showing a potential relationship between expression levels of this enzyme and cancer incidence, probably through regulation of genomic stability [ 11 ]. Interestingly, when a DNMT1 hypomorphic mutation was introduced into Apc (Min/+) mice, it suppressed later stages of intestinal tumorigenesis, but promoted early lesions in the colon and liver through a loss of heterozygosity (LOH) mechanism [ 12 ]. This observation suggests that DNA hypomethylation may play a dual role in tumorigenesis depending on different interacting environments.

Breast cancer-associated gene 1 (BRCA1) is the first identified breast tumor suppressor gene whose functions have been the subject of extensive research since its cloning [ 13 ]. Mounting evidence reveals that BRCA1 plays essential roles in many biological processes, including transcription regulation, cell cycle regulation, DNA damage repair, and centrosome duplication (reviewed in [ 14 – 17 ]). Animal models have confirmed its implication as a tumor suppressor gene [ 18 , 19 ]. However, mouse embryos carrying BRCA1-null mutations die early in gestation, displaying proliferation defects and massive apoptosis [ 18 , 20 – 22 ], and embryos carrying a homozygous deletion of Brca1 exon 11 ( Brca1 Δ11/Δ11 ), which encodes 60% of the amino acids of the protein, die at later stages of gestation because of widespread apoptosis [ 23 ]. Of note, haploinsufficiency of p53 (+/−) can suppress apoptosis in Brca1 Δ11/Δ11 embryos and allow them to develop to adulthood. However, the survivors ( Brca1 Δ11/Δ11 ;p53 +/− ) exhibit abnormalities in multiple organs/tissues, and eventually die of premature aging and tumorigenesis [ 16 , 17 , 23 – 27 ]. The pleiotropic effect of BRCA1 deficiency correlates well with the fact that BRCA1 interacts with many proteins with important functions, and that BRCA1 acts as a transcription factor, which regulates expression of many genes involved in many biological processes [ 28 , 29 ]. It was recently shown that methylation is less abundant in BRCA1-associated breast cancers compared with sporadic cases [ 30 , 31 ]. However, it is unclear if BRCA1 deficiency is directly related to this DNA hypomethylation, and whether BRCA1 affects expression of genes involved in DNA methylation, considering that global hypomethylation is a general hallmark of most cancer cells.

Here, we investigate a role of BRCA1 in DNA methylation. We show both in vitro and in vivo that BRCA1 deficiency leads to global DNA hypomethylation and chromatin abnormalities related to cancer hallmarks. We also identify the mechanism related to this potential tumor predisposing phenotype: DNMT1, the methylation maintenance enzyme, is a transcriptional target of BRCA1.

Discussion

In this study, we investigated the mechanism underlying how BRCA1 deficiency results in reduced global DNA methylation. Our analyses of cultured cells, animal tissues, and cancers revealed that absence of BRCA1 causes a marked decrease of global CpG methylation, loss of imprinting, alteration of histone modification, and hypomethylation of a number of protooncogene promoters. We further demonstrated that BRCA1 is a positive regulator of DNMT1 transcription. As DNMT1 is a potent methylation maintenance enzyme [ 3 , 4 , 8 ], our study uncovers an important role of BRCA1 in maintaining proper methylation status through regulation of DNMT1 expression.

BRCA1 is a well-established transcription factor because it regulates expression of many genes, some of which include p21 [ 44 ], Gadd45 [ 40 , 45 ], Mad2 [ 42 ], Sirt1 [ 46 ], and Igf axis members [ 39 ]. The C-terminal region of BRCA1 contains two BRCT domains that interact with multiple transcription activators and corepressors. Recently, the BRCA1 RING finger domain has been found to be involved in critical interactions with another RING domain-containing protein called BARD1. The BRCA1-BARD1 complex has an E3-ubiquitin ligase activity that might be critical to ensure BRCA1 protective functions [ 13 , 28 , 47 ]. Here, we show that BRCA1 and OCT1 bind to the promoter of DNMT1 through a potential OCT1-binding site, AACGTAA, which is identical in both the mouse and human DNMT1 promoter.

BRCA1 plays an essential role in maintaining genome integrity, as its absence results in profound chromosome abnormalities [ 14 , 15 , 29 , 48 ]. Genomic stability highly depends on DNA structure, which is called chromatin during interphase [ 49 , 50 ]. Since its discovery, chromatin has been intensively studied and the first microscopic observations identified eu- and heterochromatin [ 49 – 51 ]. While the euchromatin is the predominant site of active transcription, heterochromatin contains “inactive” DNA, which is very compacted with the presence of highly methylated DNA, notably in untranscribed regions [ 49 – 51 ]. Hypomethylation of those regions has been related to genomic instability, aging, and tumorigenesis [ 11 , 52 , 53 ]. Moreover, changes in DNA methylation levels have also been related to transcriptional regulation. The human genome conta ins 29 000 CpG islands and almost half of gene promoters contain those particular CG-rich domains that, in the case of high methylation, leads to transcriptional inactivity of these regions, which when specifically occurring in tumor suppressor genes, drives tumorigenesis [ 54 , 55 ]. On the other hand, hypomethylation of CpG islands in the promoter of oncogenes, which results in transcriptional activation, could also promote tumorigenesis.

The status of DNA methylation is primarily maintained by DNMT1, although recent results have shown that both DNMT3a and DNMT3b could also play a minor role in this process through completion of the few “holes” missed by DNMT1. It has been shown that DNMT1 deficiency in mice causes profound DNA hypomethylation that compromises embryogenesis [ 56 ], highlighting an essential role of DNMT1 in mammalian development. Severely reduced DNMT1 activity (to about 10% of wild-type level) was also reported to cause abnormal telomere recombination, aggressive T-cell lymphomas, and early lesions in the colon and liver, probably through increased genomic instability [ 11 , 12 ]. Complete knockout of DNMT1 in the human colorectal carcinoma cell line HCT116 resulted in mitotic catastrophe and genetic instability [ 57 ]. Our finding that BRCA1 regulates expression of DNMT1 is important in that it links many of BRCA1 functions to DNA methylation. We showed previously that BRCA1 deficiency in mice causes X-chromosome inactivation during spermatogenesis because of an unknown mechanism [ 58 ]. We also show here that the absence of BRCA1 causes reduced genomic imprinting. As both events are primarily mediated by hypermethylation of CpG islands, reduced DN-MT1 expression provides a reasonable explanation for these events.

In addition, BRCA1 plays many other important roles, including transcription, DNA damage repair, cell cycle regulation, centrosome duplication, spindle checkpoint control, and tumor suppression [ 14 , 15 , 29 , 48 , 59 – 61 ].

Most of those events may have a direct or indirect link to global DNA hypomethylation. It was recently shown that the overall frequency of CpG island promoter methylation is less abundant in BRCA1-associated breast cancers compared with sporadic cases [ 30 , 31 ]. These studies, which used quantitative multiplex methylation-specific PCR, were restricted to a dozen of genes (10 and 11, respectively) involved in breast carcinogenesis. They notably showed that women with BRCA1/2 mutations had a lower frequency of CpG island promoter methylation. In contrast to those studies focusing mainly on tumor suppressors genes, we show that BRCA1 samples display a higher expression of several protooncogenes associated with a global decrease in their promoter methylation restricted to the tumor samples. In the light of our findings, we believe that this could be attributed, at least in part, to decreased DNMT1 activity. Our data demonstrated that in about 30 sporadic breast cancers examined, BRCA1 expression levels positively correlate with levels of DNMT1 and global methylation status. Decreased CpG methylation of regulatory regions in promoters due to DNMT1 deficiency may cause a catastrophic effect on cell viability and genomic stability, which are similarly observed in BRCA1-deficient cells [ 29 , 56 , 57 ]. On the other hand, the genetic instability coupled with decreased CpG methylation may eventually cause inactivation of tumor suppressor genes or activation of protooncogenes, events that are gradually selected by proliferating cells, which in turn enriches for favorable alterations for tumor maintenance and progression.

Our work raises several important questions on BR-CA1-dependant pathogenesis and potential preventive issues. We have positively linked BRCA1 and DNMT1 expression. Women, who have a BRCA1 mutation in one allele, have probably lower levels of BRCA1 protein in their mammary epithelium, and consequently, might express less DNMT1 enzyme. While DNMT1 complete deficiency is lethal, hypomorphic DNMT1 activity results in substantial genome-wide hypomethylation in all tissues and development of aggressive T-cell lymphomas [ 11 , 56 ]. Thus, women with only one remaining BRCA1 allele are at risk of reduced DNMT1 levels, and subsequent higher DNA hypomethylation and genomic instability. The genomic instability should, in theory, facilitate further genetic alterations including losing the second functional BRCA1 allele, increasing risk of breast and/or ovarian tumorigenesis (model in Supplementary information, Figure S9 ). Alternatively, reduced DNMT1 levels could also cause CpG islands hypermethylation of BRCA1 promoter, leading to its inactivation. It would be interesting to evaluate DNMT1 levels, methylation status, and genomic instability in BRCA1 mutant allele carriers at different ages to see whether this is the case. Moreover, this could open a preventive window considering the dependency of DNMT1 on methyl donors to stabilize the DNA. Supplementation with methyl donor substrates might represent a preventive way to increase DNMT1 activity and to maintain the normal methylation levels in BRCA1 carriers.
