---
pmid: '16407192'
title: Herc5, an interferon-induced HECT E3 enzyme, is required for conjugation of
  ISG15 in human cells.
authors:
- Dastur A
- Beaudenon S
- Kelley M
- Krug RM
- Huibregtse JM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M512830200
---

# Herc5, an interferon-induced HECT E3 enzyme, is required for conjugation of ISG15 in human cells.
**Authors:** Dastur A, Beaudenon S, Kelley M, Krug RM, Huibregtse JM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M512830200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M512830200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 17;281(7):4334-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M512830200. Epub 2005
 Dec 28.

Herc5, an interferon-induced HECT E3 enzyme, is required for conjugation of 
ISG15 in human cells.

Dastur A(1), Beaudenon S, Kelley M, Krug RM, Huibregtse JM.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Section of Molecular Genetics 
and Microbiology, The University of Texas at Austin, 78712, USA.

ISG15 is an interferon (IFN)-alpha/beta-induced ubiquitin-like protein that is 
conjugated to cellular proteins during innate immune responses to viral and 
bacterial infections. A recent proteomics study identified 158 human proteins 
targeted for ISG15 conjugation, including the ISG15 E1 and E2 enzymes (Ube1L and 
UbcH8, respectively) and a HECT E3 enzyme, Herc5. Like the genes encoding Ube1L 
and UbcH8, expression of Herc5 was also induced by IFN-beta, suggesting that 
Herc5 might be a component of the ISG15 conjugation system. Consistent with 
this, small interfering RNAs targeting Herc5 had a dramatic effect on overall 
ISG15 conjugation in human cells, abrogating conjugation to the vast majority of 
ISG15 target proteins in vivo. In addition, co-transfection of plasmids 
expressing ISG15, Ube1L, UbcH8, and Herc5 resulted in robust ISG15 conjugation 
in non-IFN-treated cells, while the active-site cysteine mutant of Herc5 or a 
mutant lacking the RCC1 repeat region did not support ISG15 conjugation. These 
results demonstrate that Herc5 is required for conjugation of ISG15 to a broad 
spectrum of target proteins in human cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M512830200
PMID: 16407192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
