---
pmid: '25602519'
title: CDC28 phosphorylates Cac1p and regulates the association of chromatin assembly
  factor I with chromatin.
authors:
- Jeffery DC
- Kakusho N
- You Z
- Gharib M
- Wyse B
- Drury E
- Weinreich M
- Thibault P
- Verreault A
- Masai H
- Yankulov K
journal: Cell Cycle
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4352963
doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.973745
---

# CDC28 phosphorylates Cac1p and regulates the association of chromatin assembly factor I with chromatin.
**Authors:** Jeffery DC, Kakusho N, You Z, Gharib M, Wyse B, Drury E, Weinreich M, Thibault P, Verreault A, Masai H, Yankulov K
**Journal:** Cell Cycle (2015)
**DOI:** [10.4161/15384101.2014.973745](https://doi.org/10.4161/15384101.2014.973745)
**PMC:** [PMC4352963](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4352963/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(1):74-85. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.973745.

CDC28 phosphorylates Cac1p and regulates the association of chromatin assembly 
factor I with chromatin.

Jeffery DC(1), Kakusho N, You Z, Gharib M, Wyse B, Drury E, Weinreich M, 
Thibault P, Verreault A, Masai H, Yankulov K.

Author information:
(1)a Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology ; University of Guelph ; 
Guelph , Ontario , Canada.

Chromatin Assembly Factor I (CAF-I) plays a key role in the replication-coupled 
assembly of nucleosomes. It is expected that its function is linked to the 
regulation of the cell cycle, but little detail is available. Current models 
suggest that CAF-I is recruited to replication forks and to chromatin via an 
interaction between its Cac1p subunit and the replication sliding clamp, PCNA, 
and that this interaction is stimulated by the kinase CDC7. Here we show that 
another kinase, CDC28, phosphorylates Cac1p on serines 94 and 515 in early S 
phase and regulates its association with chromatin, but not its association with 
PCNA. Mutations in the Cac1p-phosphorylation sites of CDC28 but not of CDC7 
substantially reduce the in vivo phosphorylation of Cac1p. However, mutations in 
the putative CDC7 target sites on Cac1p reduce its stability. The association of 
CAF-I with chromatin is impaired in a cdc28-1 mutant and to a lesser extent in a 
cdc7-1 mutant. In addition, mutations in the Cac1p-phosphorylation sites by both 
CDC28 and CDC7 reduce gene silencing at the telomeres. We propose that this 
phosphorylation represents a regulatory step in the recruitment of CAF-I to 
chromatin in early S phase that is distinct from the association of CAF-I with 
PCNA. Hence, we implicate CDC28 in the regulation of chromatin reassembly during 
DNA replication. These findings provide novel mechanistic insights on the links 
between cell-cycle regulation, DNA replication and chromatin reassembly.

DOI: 10.4161/15384101.2014.973745
PMCID: PMC4352963
PMID: 25602519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Chromatin Assembly Factor I (CAF-I) plays a key role in the replication-coupled assembly
of nucleosomes. It is expected that its function is linked to the regulation of the cell
cycle, but little detail is available. Current models suggest that CAF-I is recruited to
replication forks and to chromatin via an interaction between its Cac1p subunit and the
replication sliding clamp, PCNA, and that this interaction is stimulated by the kinase CDC7 . Here we show that another kinase, CDC28 ,
phosphorylates Cac1p on serines 94 and 515 in early S phase and regulates its association
with chromatin, but not its association with PCNA. Mutations in the Cac1p-phosphorylation
sites of CDC28 but not of CDC7 substantially reduce the in vivo phosphorylation of Cac1p. However, mutations in the putative CDC7 target sites on Cac1p reduce its stability. The association of
CAF-I with chromatin is impaired in a cdc28–1 mutant and to a
lesser extent in a cdc7–1 mutant. In addition, mutations in the
Cac1p-phosphorylation sites by both CDC28 and CDC7 reduce gene silencing at the telomeres. We propose that this phosphorylation represents a
regulatory step in the recruitment of CAF-I to chromatin in early S phase that is distinct
from the association of CAF-I with PCNA. Hence, we implicate CDC28 in the
regulation of chromatin reassembly during DNA replication. These findings provide novel
mechanistic insights on the links between cell-cycle regulation, DNA replication and
chromatin reassembly.

Introduction

Chromatin Assembly Factor I (CAF-I) is a histone chaperone that plays a central role in the
reassembly of nucleosomes after the passage of replication forks. 1,2 It receives “old” H3/H4 histones
from the disassembled nucleosomes plus newly supplied histones from another histone
chaperone, ASF1. It is believed that the CAF-I/ASF1-mediated feedback from the
“old” nucleosomes warrants the preservation of histone marks and the epigenetic
transmission of the chromatin state. 2

It is believed that CAF-I is recruited to replication forks via contacts with PCNA
(Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen, POL30 ), the DNA replication sliding
clamp. 3-6 Mutations in POL30 or CAC1 (which encodes the largest
subunit of CAF-I) that cripple their interaction in vitro also impair the
assembly of chromatin in vitro 3,7 and show gene silencing defects in vivo. 7–10 However, the mechanisms that regulate the association of CAF-I with PCNA and with chromatin
are poorly understood. Many PCNA-interacting proteins share a PIP (PCNA Interaction Peptide)
consensus. Two PIPs are present in the largest CAF-I subunit in humans, but only one in S.cerevisiae. 3 The S.cerevisiae PIP in Cac1p is required for the interaction with PCNA. 7 An additional PIP is found in the Cac2p
subunit of CAF-I in both species, but this PIP alone does not confer binding to PCNA. 3

CAF-I is phosphorylated in vivo, 11 however the identity of the kinases and the consequences of its
phosphorylation are not certain. Inhibitors of Protein Phosphatase 1 or of CDK2 kinase
reduce the CAF-I driven assembly of nucleosomes in human cell extracts, but these effects
cannot be directly attributed to the phosphorylation of CAF-I. 12 Another in vitro experiment has shown
that the phosphorylation of the largest subunit of the human CAF-I (p150) by the Cdc7-Dbf4
kinase, but not by CDK2, promoted its binding to PCNA. 6 It remains unclear if Cdc7-Dbf4 regulates the association of CAF-I
with chromatin and PCNA in vivo . Therefore, the precise regulation of CAF-I
by protein kinases remains poorly understood.

Two kinases, Cdc7p-Dbf4p (Dbf4-Dependent Kinase, DDK) and Cdc28p (a homolog of Cdk2,
hereafter referred to as CDK), play distinct critical roles during S phase in S.cerevisiae. 13 Both kinases are essential and regulate key events at the onset of DNA replication that
coincide with the presumed loading of CAF-I on replication forks. 14 In the present study we have embarked on a detailed
investigation of the phosphorylation of Cac1p by these two kinases. Our results strongly
suggest that CDK is the key Cac1p kinase and regulates the association of CAF-I with
chromatin.

Discussion

In this study we have demonstrated that CDK phosphorylates Cac1p on S94 and S515. These
phosphorylation events take place during the G1/S transition and/or early S phase and
regulate the association of Cac1p, and presumably CAF-I, with chromatin. Although this
timing coincides with the activation of early origins of DNA replication, the
phosphorylation of S94 and S515 does not seem to directly regulate the interaction of CAF-I
with PCNA and presumably with the replication forks. We postulate that there is a
CDK-dependent step in the recruitment of CAF-I to chromatin that is distinct from the
PCNA-controlled step. In support of this idea, we and others have reported an incomplete
overlap in the in vivo effects of mutations that impair the interaction
between PCNA and Cac1p, and the deletion of CAC1 itself. 5,7,28

While this study highlights the role of CDC28 as a direct regulator of
CAF-I, it sheds some uncertainty on the role of CDC7 . In human cell
extracts DDK acts as a regulator of the PCNA-CAF-I association. 6 We did not obtain strong support for this model by our in vivo studies in S.cerevisiae . We have confirmed that
DDK phosphorylates Cac1p in vitro and have identified S503 as a target of
this kinase, but we failed to show a functional consequence of this phosphorylation. Hence,
the question of whether and how DDK regulates CAF-I in S.cerevisiae remains
unanswered. Genome-wide proteome studies have pointed to 13 phosphorylation sites on this
peptide. 11 Some of these sites
conform to the preferred DDK targets of S/T residues adjacent to D. 37-36 In particular, the serine at
position 238 could be such a target. Because of technical issues we could not fully assess
the contribution of the S238A mutation to the control of CAF-I. It is possible that DDK
transiently phosphorylates S238 and in conjunction with S503 could influence its activity or
stability. Even more, in addition to the largest subunit of CAF-I, DDK phosphorylates many
other substrates. These are involved in the regulation of the cell cycle, of replication
fork stalling, of DNA damage and of meiosis. 13,23,37–41 Some of these processes could directly or indirectly
affect the activity, the association partners and/or the turnover of CAF-I. In summary, our
data does not contradict the model that DDK regulates the PCNA-Cac1p interaction. 6 However, we believe that this model only
partially depicts the complex relationship between CAF-I and DDK.

What are the consequences of the phosphorylation of Cac1p by CDK and DDK? The answer to
this question is hampered by the moderate phenotypes caused by the destruction of histone
chaperones. 9,28,32,42 For example, our experiments could not reveal if CDK
affects the nucleosome assembly activity of CAF-I because the destruction of CAF-I alone or
in conjunction with other histone chaperones seems to have little effect. Therefore, the
issue of whether CAF-I is regulated by activation or simply by recruitment remains to be
addressed. Similarly, the redundancy of chaperone function is also likely to contribute to
the lack of effects of the S→A mutations on sensitivity to DNA damage. At present we
do not rule out a link between CAF-I phosphorylation and its function in DNA repair. In
particular, CDC7 is known to be involved in DNA repair. 43 It is possible that a temporal
phosphorylation of Cac1p by CDC7 could contribute to the response to DNA
damage, but this effect is tied to other CDC7 regulated events. The only
detectable consequence of the mutations in the kinase target sites was a reduction in
telomeric gene silencing ( Fig. 7 ).
Although the effects do not phenocopy the deletion of CAC1 , the experiments
clearly point to the involvement of both CDC7 and CDC28 ,
with the CDC28 phosphorylation sites having a more prominent role. It is
apparent that the phosphorylations by CDK and DDK are necessary, but not sufficient to
confer strong TPE phenotypes. Hence, the 2 kinases are true regulators of the activity of
CAF-I.

It is well established that the ablation of CAC1 causes de-repression of
sub-telomeric genes. However, an earlier study has pointed out that mutations in CAC1 that affect its binding to PCNA ( cac1–13 and cac1–20 ) only mildly disturb the telomere position effects. 7 Now we add that mutations that affect
the binding of CAF-I to chromatin also have minor consequences. Together, these observations
show a level of complexity in the control of telomere position effects by CAF-I that we do
not understand. It is tempting to speculate that the undisturbed telomere position effects
are a result of a redundancy in the recruitment of CAF-I by a PCNA-dependent mechanism
driven by DDK and a PCNA-independent mechanism driven by CDK. The investigation of this
possibility is beyond the scope of this study.

In this study we point to a direct role of CDC28 in the phosphorylation of
the Cac1p subunit of CAF-I and its loading to chromatin. We implicate CDC28 in the regulation of chromatin assembly during DNA replication. This novel role for CDK
broadens the scope of its effects as a master-regulator of the cell cycle. We also point to
a possible redundancy of a DDK/PCNA-regulated and a CDK-regulated steps for the association
of CAF-I with chromatin.
