---
pmid: '14703513'
title: Identification of Ser-386 of interferon regulatory factor 3 as critical target
  for inducible phosphorylation that determines activation.
authors:
- Mori M
- Yoneyama M
- Ito T
- Takahashi K
- Inagaki F
- Fujita T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M310616200
---

# Identification of Ser-386 of interferon regulatory factor 3 as critical target for inducible phosphorylation that determines activation.
**Authors:** Mori M, Yoneyama M, Ito T, Takahashi K, Inagaki F, Fujita T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M310616200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M310616200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 12;279(11):9698-702. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M310616200. Epub 
2003 Dec 31.

Identification of Ser-386 of interferon regulatory factor 3 as critical target 
for inducible phosphorylation that determines activation.

Mori M(1), Yoneyama M, Ito T, Takahashi K, Inagaki F, Fujita T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Japan.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-3 is a critical transcription factor 
regulating innate immune responses against viral and bacterial infections. 
Signals activated by various pathogens are integrated by IRF-3 kinase, resulting 
in the specific phosphorylation of IRF-3 in the cytoplasm. This phosphorylation 
induces dimerization and association with the coactivators CREB-binding 
protein/p300, and the resultant complex activates the target genes in the 
nucleus. However, the phosphorylation sites that determine the active/inactive 
status of IRF-3 have been a source of controversy. In this study, we generated 
an antibody that specifically detects the phosphorylation of Ser-386 and used it 
as a probe. We found: 1) viral infection specifically induces phosphorylation of 
the Ser-386; 2) recently identified IRF-3 kinases (IKK-i/epsilon and TBK-1) 
phosphorylate Ser-386 and induce its dimerization; 3) phosphorylation of Ser-386 
is exclusively observed with the dimer; 4) mutation at Ser-386 abolishes the 
dimerization potential; 5) a constitutively active 5D mutant designed to mimic 
phosphorylation of Ser/Thr residues other than Ser-385 and -386 is secondarily 
phosphorylated at Ser-386, presumably by an irrelevant kinase. These results 
strongly suggest that Ser-386 is the target of the IRF-3 kinase and critical 
determinant for the activation of IRF-3.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M310616200
PMID: 14703513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
