---
pmid: '18716619'
title: CDK targets Sae2 to control DNA-end resection and homologous recombination.
authors:
- Huertas P
- Cortés-Ledesma F
- Sartori AA
- Aguilera A
- Jackson SP
journal: Nature
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2635538
doi: 10.1038/nature07215
---

# CDK targets Sae2 to control DNA-end resection and homologous recombination.
**Authors:** Huertas P, Cortés-Ledesma F, Sartori AA, Aguilera A, Jackson SP
**Journal:** Nature (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature07215](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07215)
**PMC:** [PMC2635538](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2635538/)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2008 Oct 2;455(7213):689-92. doi: 10.1038/nature07215. Epub 2008 Aug
20.

CDK targets Sae2 to control DNA-end resection and homologous recombination.

Huertas P(1), Cortés-Ledesma F, Sartori AA, Aguilera A, Jackson SP.

Author information:
(1)The Wellcome Trust and Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, and Department of 
Zoology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK.

DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are repaired by two principal mechanisms: 
non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) and homologous recombination (HR). HR is the 
most accurate DSB repair mechanism but is generally restricted to the S and G2 
phases of the cell cycle, when DNA has been replicated and a sister chromatid is 
available as a repair template. By contrast, NHEJ operates throughout the cell 
cycle but assumes most importance in G1 (refs 4, 6). The choice between repair 
pathways is governed by cyclin-dependent protein kinases (CDKs), with a major 
site of control being at the level of DSB resection, an event that is necessary 
for HR but not NHEJ, and which takes place most effectively in S and G2 (refs 2, 
5). Here we establish that cell-cycle control of DSB resection in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae results from the phosphorylation by CDK of an evolutionarily 
conserved motif in the Sae2 protein. We show that mutating Ser 267 of Sae2 to a 
non-phosphorylatable residue causes phenotypes comparable to those of a 
sae2Delta null mutant, including hypersensitivity to camptothecin, defective 
sporulation, reduced hairpin-induced recombination, severely impaired DNA-end 
processing and faulty assembly and disassembly of HR factors. Furthermore, a 
Sae2 mutation that mimics constitutive Ser 267 phosphorylation complements these 
phenotypes and overcomes the necessity of CDK activity for DSB resection. The 
Sae2 mutations also cause cell-cycle-stage specific hypersensitivity to DNA 
damage and affect the balance between HR and NHEJ. These findings therefore 
provide a mechanistic basis for cell-cycle control of DSB repair and highlight 
the importance of regulating DSB resection.

DOI: 10.1038/nature07215
PMCID: PMC2635538
PMID: 18716619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are repaired by two principal mechanisms: non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) and homologous recombination (HR) 1 . HR is the most accurate DSB repair mechanism but is generally restricted to the S and G2 phases of the cell cycle, when DNA has been replicated and a sister chromatid is available as a repair template 2 - 5 . By contrast, NHEJ operates throughout the cell cycle but assumes most importance in G1 (refs 4 ​, ​6 ). The choice between repair pathways is governed by cyclin-dependent protein kinases (CDKs) 2 , 3 , 5 , 7 , with a major site of control being at the level of DSB resection, an event that is necessary for HR but not NHEJ, and which takes place most effectively in S and G2 (refs 2 ​, ​5 ). Here we establish that cell-cycle control of DSB resection in Saccharomyces cerevisiae results from the phosphorylation by CDK of an evolutionarily conserved motif in the Sae2 protein. We show that mutating Ser 267 of Sae2 to a non-phosphorylatable residue causes phenotypes comparable to those of a sae2Δ null mutant, including hypersensitivity to camptothecin, defective sporulation, reduced hairpin-induced recombination, severely impaired DNA-end processing and faulty assembly and disassembly of HR factors. Furthermore, a Sae2 mutation that mimics constitutive Ser 267 phosphorylation complements these phenotypes and overcomes the necessity of CDK activity for DSB resection. The Sae2 mutations also cause cell-cycle-stage specific hypersensitivity to DNA damage and affect the balance between HR and NHEJ. These findings therefore provide a mechanistic basis for cell-cycle control of DSB repair and highlight the importance of regulating DSB resection.

METHODS SUMMARY

A sae2Δ strain in W303 background 9 , 14 was transformed with plasmids harbouring the indicated SAE2 mutant and used in all experiments except those listed below. For Figs 1a and 2b , a Sae2-TAP strain (Open Biosystems) was used. In Fig. 2e, f , a strain harbouring the indicated Sae2 mutant at its chromosomal locus in the SK1 background was used. For Fig. 3 , we deleted SAE2 in a strain harbouring the cdc28as1 allele in the JKM179 background 5 . The W5573-15D strain was used in Fig. 4a-c (ref. 25 ). A sae2 -deleted OIS-15 strain was used in Fig. 4e (ref. 27 ). Yeasts were grown with standard procedures. When indicated, cells were arrested in G1 with α-factor and in G2 with nocodazole. DNA resection assays 22 , focus formation 25 , recombination between sister chromatids 27 and NHEJ assays 30 were as described previously. CtIP downregulation was as previously reported 17 . Western blotting was by standard methods.
