---
pmid: '21151116'
title: A methylation and phosphorylation switch between an adjacent lysine and serine
  determines human DNMT1 stability.
authors:
- Estève PO
- Chang Y
- Samaranayake M
- Upadhyay AK
- Horton JR
- Feehery GR
- Cheng X
- Pradhan S
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3048033
doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1939
---

# A methylation and phosphorylation switch between an adjacent lysine and serine determines human DNMT1 stability.
**Authors:** Estève PO, Chang Y, Samaranayake M, Upadhyay AK, Horton JR, Feehery GR, Cheng X, Pradhan S
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb.1939](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.1939)
**PMC:** [PMC3048033](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3048033/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Jan;18(1):42-8. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1939. Epub 2010
Dec  12.

A methylation and phosphorylation switch between an adjacent lysine and serine 
determines human DNMT1 stability.

Estève PO(1), Chang Y, Samaranayake M, Upadhyay AK, Horton JR, Feehery GR, Cheng 
X, Pradhan S.

Author information:
(1)New England Biolabs, Ipswich, Massachusetts, USA.

The protein lysine methyltransferase SET7 regulates DNA methyltransferase-1 
(DNMT1) activity in mammalian cells by promoting degradation of DNMT1 and thus 
allows epigenetic changes via DNA demethylation. Here we reveal an interplay 
between monomethylation of DNMT1 Lys142 by SET7 and phosphorylation of DNMT1 
Ser143 by AKT1 kinase. These two modifications are mutually exclusive, and 
structural analysis suggests that Ser143 phosphorylation interferes with Lys142 
monomethylation. AKT1 kinase colocalizes and directly interacts with DNMT1 and 
phosphorylates Ser143. Phosphorylated DNMT1 peaks during DNA synthesis, before 
DNMT1 methylation. Depletion of AKT1 or overexpression of dominant-negative AKT1 
increases methylated DNMT1, resulting in a decrease in DNMT1 abundance. In 
mammalian cells, phosphorylated DNMT1 is more stable than methylated DNMT1. 
These results reveal cross-talk on DNMT1, through modifications mediated by AKT1 
and SET7, that affects cellular DNMT1 levels.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.1939
PMCID: PMC3048033
PMID: 21151116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The protein lysine methyltransferase SET7 regulates DNA methyltransferase-1 (DNMT1) activity in mammalian cells by promoting degradation of DNMT1 and thus allows epigenetic changes via DNA demethylation. Here we reveal an interplay between monomethylation of DNMT1 Lys142 by SET7 and phosphorylation of DNMT1 Ser143 by AKT1 kinase. These two modifications are mutually exclusive, and structural analysis suggests that Ser143 phosphorylation interferes with Lys142 monomethylation. AKT1 kinase colocalizes and directly interacts with DNMT1 and phosphorylates Ser143. Phosphorylated DNMT1 peaks during DNA synthesis, before DNMT1 methylation. Depletion of AKT1 or overexpression of dominant-negative AKT1 increases methylated DNMT1, resulting in a decrease in DNMT1 abundance. In mammalian cells, phosphorylated DNMT1 is more stable than methylated DNMT1. These results reveal cross-talk on DNMT1, through modifications mediated by AKT1 and SET7, that affects cellular DNMT1 levels.

DISCUSSION

Previous work has shown that covalent post-translational modifications are widely used for regulation of stability 15 , 23 , 24 . Apart from DNMT1, SET7 also mediates methylation of RelA protein, and methylated RelA negatively regulates the transcriptional activation of NF-κB 24 . Here we show that interplay of Ser143 phosphorylation and Lys142 methylation is a key signal regulating the stability or degradation of DNMT1. The DNMT1 species phosphorylated by AKT1 (DNMT1-pSer143) has a higher half-life than the DNMT1-Lys142me1 species. Therefore, the methyl-phospho switch between these adjacent residues, Lys142 and Ser143, determines the stability of DNMT1.

According to our results, this cross-talk could involve dynamic interaction between SET7, AKT1, a protein lysine demethylase—perhaps LSD1 (ref. 17 )—and a yet-to-be-determined protein phosphatase to maintain DNMT1 stability in cells ( Fig. 4g ). Another noteworthy observation is that endogenous AKT1 stimulation did not result in immediate phosphorylation of Ser143 of DNMT1 ( Supplementary Fig. 1f ). Clear DNMT1 phosphorylation was visible only after 8 h, suggesting that this phosphorylation is mediated by the cell cycle ( Fig. 3d,e ). An explanation for the delayed phosphorylation of DNMT1 may be that AKT1 has poor access to the DNMT1 N-terminal region. Indeed, the region surrounding Ser143 of DNMT1 binds to PCNA, Rb, HDACs, G9a and host of other proteins 25 – 28 . Therefore, the phosphorylation event on DNMT1 could be regulated by additional, cell cycle–dependent events, as certain binding proteins need to be released before phosphorylation can proceed. Furthermore, misregulation of DNMT1 turnover during the cell cycle may also aid in epigenome stability.

A question emerges from our observations regarding the possible existence of dual modification of Lys142me1 and pSer143 on DNMT1. The results presented here indicate that DNMT1-pSer143 is the predominant stable form of the enzyme and is resistant to Lys142 methylation. However, in our kinase assay on DNMT1K142me1 peptide, a small amount of phosphorylation was observed. Although this result suggests that a small percentage of DNMT1 may have dual modifications, the majority of methylated DNMT1 will be degraded. From all the experiments we have performed, we have little evidence of dually (Lys142me1 and pSer143) modified DNMT1 in cells. However, we cannot rule out its presence absolutely during development or disease stages.

Our observations lead to the hypothesis that if the AKT1-phosphorylated DNMT1 species is more nuclear and is resistant to degradation by the proteasome pathway, then cells with upregulated AKT1 should show aberrant DNA methylation. AKT1 kinase activity has been implicated in the pathophysiology of many different tumors, including multiple myeloma, prostate, breast and liver 29 , 30 . For example, promoter hypermethylation of the tumor-suppressor gene cystatin M ( CST6 ) is associated with aberrant AKT1 activation in breast epithelial cells 31 . Data reported here suggest that the interplay between AKT1-mediated stabilization of DNMT1 and SET7-mediated degradation of DNMT1 creates a delicate balance resulting in epigenetic modulation of gene expression during the cell cycle and development ( Fig. 4g ). Furthermore, the cell may use such switch mechanism(s) to regulate other key epigenetic modifiers in different cellular processes.

METHODS

Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper at http://www.nature.com/nsmb/ .
