---
pmid: '10855792'
title: VCP, a weak ATPase involved in multiple cellular events, interacts physically
  with BRCA1 in the nucleus of living cells.
authors:
- Zhang H
- Wang Q
- Kajino K
- Greene MI
journal: DNA Cell Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1089/10445490050021168
---

# VCP, a weak ATPase involved in multiple cellular events, interacts physically with BRCA1 in the nucleus of living cells.
**Authors:** Zhang H, Wang Q, Kajino K, Greene MI
**Journal:** DNA Cell Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1089/10445490050021168](https://doi.org/10.1089/10445490050021168)

## Abstract

1. DNA Cell Biol. 2000 May;19(5):253-63. doi: 10.1089/10445490050021168.

VCP, a weak ATPase involved in multiple cellular events, interacts physically 
with BRCA1 in the nucleus of living cells.

Zhang H(1), Wang Q, Kajino K, Greene MI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia 19104-6082, USA.

BRCA1, a breast/ovarian cancer susceptibility gene, undergoes mutations in as 
many as 50% of familial breast tumors. Recent studies indicate that BRCA1 may be 
involved in DNA damage repair. Here, we demonstrate that the BRCA1 protein 
physically associates with valosin-containing protein (VCP), a member of the 
ATPases associated with a variety of cellular activities (AAA) superfamily. In 
vitro studies revealed that VCP, via its N- terminal region, binds to amino acid 
residues 303-625 in the BRCA1 protein. Although found predominantly in the 
cytoplasm and, less abundantly, in the nucleus, VCP can be translocated from the 
nucleus after stimulation with epidermal growth factor. Collectively, our 
results suggest that VCP, by binding to BRCA1, participates in the DNA 
damage-repair function as an ATP transporter, possibly facilitating the 
transcription-coupled repair.

DOI: 10.1089/10445490050021168
PMID: 10855792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
