---
pmid: '11707463'
title: A Golgi-associated PDZ domain protein modulates cystic fibrosis transmembrane
  regulator plasma membrane expression.
authors:
- Cheng J
- Moyer BD
- Milewski M
- Loffing J
- Ikeda M
- Mickle JE
- Cutting GR
- Li M
- Stanton BA
- Guggino WB
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110177200
---

# A Golgi-associated PDZ domain protein modulates cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator plasma membrane expression.
**Authors:** Cheng J, Moyer BD, Milewski M, Loffing J, Ikeda M, Mickle JE, Cutting GR, Li M, Stanton BA, Guggino WB
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110177200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110177200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 1;277(5):3520-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110177200. Epub 2001 
Nov 13.

A Golgi-associated PDZ domain protein modulates cystic fibrosis transmembrane 
regulator plasma membrane expression.

Cheng J(1), Moyer BD, Milewski M, Loffing J, Ikeda M, Mickle JE, Cutting GR, Li 
M, Stanton BA, Guggino WB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

We identified a novel cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator 
(CFTR)-associating, PDZ domain-containing protein, CAL (CFTR associated ligand) 
containing two predicted coiled-coiled domains and one PDZ domain. The PDZ 
domain of CAL binds to the C terminus of CFTR. Although CAL does not have any 
predicted transmembrane domains, CAL is associated with membranes mediated by a 
region containing the coiled-coil domains. CAL is located primarily at the Golgi 
apparatus, co-localizing with trans-Golgi markers and is sensitive to Brefeldin 
A treatment. Immunoprecipitation experiments suggest that CAL exists as a 
multimer. Overexpression of CAL reduces CFTR chloride currents in mammalian 
cells and decreases expression, rate of insertion and half-life of CFTR in the 
plasma membrane. The Na(+)/H(+) exchanger regulatory factor, NHE-RF, a subplasma 
membrane PDZ domain protein, restores cell surface expression of CFTR and 
chloride currents. In addition, NHE-RF inhibits the binding of CAL to CFTR. CAL 
modulates the surface expression of CFTR. CAL favors retention of CFTR within 
the cell, whereas NHE-RF favors surface expression by competing with CAL for the 
binding of CFTR. Thus, the regulation of CFTR in the plasma membrane involves 
the dynamic interaction between at least two PDZ domain proteins.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110177200
PMID: 11707463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
