---
pmid: '17541404'
title: Interactions between human BRCA2 protein and the meiosis-specific recombinase
  DMC1.
authors:
- Thorslund T
- Esashi F
- West SC
journal: EMBO J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC1894777
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601739
---

# Interactions between human BRCA2 protein and the meiosis-specific recombinase DMC1.
**Authors:** Thorslund T, Esashi F, West SC
**Journal:** EMBO J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601739](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601739)
**PMC:** [PMC1894777](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1894777/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2007 Jun 20;26(12):2915-22. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601739. Epub 2007
May  31.

Interactions between human BRCA2 protein and the meiosis-specific recombinase 
DMC1.

Thorslund T(1), Esashi F, West SC.

Author information:
(1)Clare Hall Laboratories, Cancer Research UK, London Research Institute, South 
Mimms, Herts, UK.

Germline mutations in BRCA2 predispose to hereditary breast cancers. BRCA2 
protein regulates recombinational repair by interaction with RAD51 via a series 
of degenerate BRC repeat motifs encoded by exon 11 (BRCA2(996-2113)), and an 
unrelated C-terminal domain (BRCA2(3265-3330)). BRCA2 is also required for 
meiotic recombination. Here, we show that human BRCA2 binds the meiosis-specific 
recombinase DMC1 and define the primary DMC1 interaction site to a 26 amino-acid 
region (BRCA2(2386-2411)). This region is highly conserved in BRCA2 proteins 
from a variety of mammalian species, but is absent in BRCA2 from Arabidopsis 
thaliana, Caenorhabditis elegans, and other eukaryotes. We demonstrate the 
critical importance of Phe2406, Pro2408, and Pro2409 at the conserved motif 
(2404)KVFVPPFK(2411). This interaction domain, defined as the PhePP motif, 
promotes specific interactions between BRCA2 and DMC1, but not with RAD51. Thus, 
the RAD51 and DMC1 interaction domains on BRCA2 are distinct from each other, 
allowing coordinated interactions of the two recombinases with BRCA2 at meiosis. 
These results lead us to suggest that BRCA2 is a universal regulator of 
RAD51/DMC1 recombinase actions.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601739
PMCID: PMC1894777
PMID: 17541404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Germline mutations in BRCA2 predispose to hereditary breast cancers. BRCA2 protein regulates recombinational repair by interaction with RAD51 via a series of degenerate BRC repeat motifs encoded by exon 11 (BRCA2 996–2113 ), and an unrelated C-terminal domain (BRCA2 3265–3330 ). BRCA2 is also required for meiotic recombination. Here, we show that human BRCA2 binds the meiosis-specific recombinase DMC1 and define the primary DMC1 interaction site to a 26 amino-acid region (BRCA2 2386–2411 ). This region is highly conserved in BRCA2 proteins from a variety of mammalian species, but is absent in BRCA2 from Arabidopsis thaliana , Caenorhabditis elegans , and other eukaryotes. We demonstrate the critical importance of Phe2406, Pro2408, and Pro2409 at the conserved motif 2404 KVFVPPFK 2411 . This interaction domain, defined as the PhePP motif, promotes specific interactions between BRCA2 and DMC1, but not with RAD51. Thus, the RAD51 and DMC1 interaction domains on BRCA2 are distinct from each other, allowing coordinated interactions of the two recombinases with BRCA2 at meiosis. These results lead us to suggest that BRCA2 is a universal regulator of RAD51/DMC1 recombinase actions.

Introduction

The BRCA2 tumour suppressor protein is involved in maintaining the integrity of our genome by its participation in error-free double-strand break (DSB) repair via homologous recombination (HR; Venkitaraman, 2002 ). It does so by regulating the actions of RAD51 protein. Recombinases belonging to the RecA/RadA/RAD51 family play a key role in HR by binding to single-stranded DNA generated at the site of a DSB, to form helical nucleoprotein filaments that interact with homologous DNA and promote strand exchange ( West, 2003 ). BRCA2 and RAD51 interact through a series of eight degenerative motifs within the exon 11 region of BRCA2, which are called the BRC repeats ( Bignell et al , 1997 ; Wong et al , 1997 ; Chen et al , 1998b ). In addition, there is an unrelated RAD51-binding site located close to the C terminus of BRCA2 ( Mizuta et al , 1997 ; Sharan et al , 1997 ), which is regulated in a cell cycle- and DNA damage-dependent manner ( Esashi et al , 2005 ). In response to DNA damage, RAD51 localises to nuclear foci with BRCA2 ( Scully et al , 1997 ; Sharan et al , 1997 ; Chen et al , 1998a ), by a mechanism that is BRCA2-dependent ( Yuan et al , 1999 ). Consistent with a role for BRCA2 in the regulation of HR, BRCA2-deficient cells are defective in DSB repair ( Moynahan et al , 2001 ; Xia et al , 2001 ) and exhibit spontaneous gross chromosomal rearrangements ( Yu et al , 2000 ).

HR has a dual cellular function: while it maintains the integrity of DNA in somatic cells, it creates genetic variability by directing DNA exchanges in meiotic cells that result in random combinations of alleles and traits. BRCA2 appears to play an important role in meiotic recombination in mammalian cells, as it is highly expressed during spermatogenesis in mice ( Connor et al , 1997 ), and localises to meiotic chromosomes during early prophase I when homologous chromosomes undergo pairing ( Chen et al , 1998a ). Although targeted disruption of the BRCA2 gene in mouse leads to embryonic lethality ( Ludwig et al , 1997 ; Sharan et al , 1997 ; Suzuki et al , 1997 ), an analysis of the role of BRCA2 in meiosis has been made possible through the generation of a viable Brca2 null mouse carrying a bacterial artificial chromosome containing the human BRCA2 gene ( Sharan et al , 2004 ). These mice, which exhibit low levels of expression of human BRCA2 protein in the gonads, are infertile because spermatocytes fail to progress beyond the early prophase I stage of meiosis. A role for BRCA2 in meiotic recombination has also been demonstrated in Arabidopsis thaliana where siRNA against BRCA2 leads to meiotic defects and partial sterility ( Siaud et al , 2004 ).

In addition to RAD51, meiotic recombination requires the functions of DMC1, a meiosis-specific paralog of RAD51 ( Bishop et al , 1992 ; Yoshida et al , 1998 ). Like RAD51, recombinant human DMC1 protein forms octameric rings that are capable of binding DNA and forming helical nucleoprotein filaments that catalyse strand exchange ( Masson et al , 1999 ; Passy et al , 1999 ; Kinebuchi et al , 2004 ; Sehorn et al , 2004 ; Bugreev et al , 2005 ). The two recombinases colocalise to nuclear foci during meiotic recombination ( Bishop, 1994 ; Chen et al , 1998a ; Tarsounas et al , 1999 ). Consistent with these observations, mouse Dmc1 knockouts are infertile due to defects in chromosome synapsis during meiotic recombination ( Pittman et al , 1998 ; Yoshida et al , 1998 ). However, it is not known how these two recombinases function during meiosis, whether they play independent roles or act in concert, or how their activities are regulated and coordinated.

A potential role for BRCA2 in coordinating the activities of RAD51 and DMC1 was implied by studies showing that meiotic chromosomes from mouse spermatocytes exhibiting impaired expression of BRCA2 had reduced numbers of RAD51 and DMC1 foci ( Sharan et al , 2004 ). Also, in plants the At BRCA2 protein has been shown to interact with At DMC1, an interaction mediated by one of the four BRC repeats (BRC2) found in At BRCA2 ( Siaud et al , 2004 ; Dray et al , 2006 ). To date, however, there is no information relating to interactions between mammalian BRCA2 and DMC1 proteins.

In this study, we define the interactions between human BRCA2 and DMC1. Surprisingly, we found that the primary DMC1 interaction domain of BRCA2 maps to a region of BRCA2 that is distinct from the BRC repeats that facilitate interactions with RAD51. These results provide the first insight into understanding the coordinating role that BRCA2 provides in mammalian meiotic recombination.

Discussion

In this work, we have demonstrated that human BRCA2 is capable of binding the meiosis-specific recombinase DMC1 via two different binding sites. The first is located at the C terminus of BRCA2 and corresponds to the region also bound by RAD51 protein. The second, however, represents the primary DMC1 interaction domain located within the relatively uncharacterised central part of BRCA2, contained within B2-6. Using yeast two-hybrid assays, pull-down experiments, and peptide arrays, we defined this interaction domain to the region corresponding to BRCA2 2386–2411 . Within this region, we showed the critical importance of Phe2406, Pro2408, and Pro2409 located in the conserved motif KVFVPPFK, and for simplicity will refer to this DMC1 interaction domain as the PhePP motif.

The PhePP motif of BRCA2 interacts specifically with DMC1, and not with RAD51. The importance of the region is indicated by its conservation in different mammalian species and in chicken BRCA2. This DMC1 interaction domain, however, is divergent in BRCA2 homologues from other eukaryotes such as A. thaliana and C. elegans . When our studies were initiated, we were surprised to identify this novel interaction domain, as it was known that At BRCA2 and At DMC1 can interact through one of the four degenerate plant BRC repeats ( Dray et al , 2006 ). However, modelling studies based on the crystal structure of a RAD51-BRC4 fusion protein suggest that DMC1 has polar or charged residues at the hydrophobic RAD51-binding patch for BRC4, which is likely to preclude its interaction with this BRC repeat ( Pellegrini et al , 2002 ; Lo et al , 2003 ). It might also be significant that the At BRCA2 proteins (there are two At BRCA2 isoforms at 1151 or 1155 amino acids) are considerably shorter than the human counterpart (3418 amino acids), such that two of the plant BRC repeats (BRC4 and BRC2, respectively) have evolved independently to interact with either RAD51 or DMC1 ( Dray et al , 2006 ). It remains to be established whether the diverged PhePP motif in A. thaliana can interact with AtDMC1. The divergence of the PhePP domain in C. elegans is less surprising given the absence of DMC1 in this organism, which promotes meiotic recombination through the high-level expression of RAD51 alone ( Takanami et al , 2000 ).

In addition to the specific DMC1 interaction domain in BRCA2, we found that DMC1, like RAD51, could interact with the C-terminal region of BRCA2 known as TR2 (BRCA2 3265–3330 ). In comparison to the RAD51-TR2 interaction, the association of DMC1 with TR2 appears to be relatively weak, and it was found that RAD51 could easily compete with DMC1 for the C-terminal interaction site. However, it is known that interactions between RAD51 and the C terminus of BRCA2 are blocked by S3291 phosphorylation, a modification event that has little or no impact upon DMC1 binding. Thus, circumstances might exist that would favour DMC1, rather than RAD51, interaction with the BRCA2 C terminus. Our attempts to demonstrate phosphorylation of S3291 during meiotic recombination, which might favour interactions with DMC1 have so far proven to be unsuccessful, so the relevance of this potential binding switch upon phosphorylation is presently unknown. However, the lack of meiotic defects in mice harbouring deletions of the BRCA2 C terminus may well indicate that interactions between the BRCA2 C-terminal region and RAD51/DMC1 may not be so critical for the functions of BRCA2 during meiotic recombination ( Atanassov et al , 2005 ).

The precise role played by BRCA2 in regulating homologous recombinational repair of DNA DSBs has yet to be fully defined. However, we are now beginning to understand the key role played by this protein in binding RAD51 and facilitating its relocalisation in somatic cells in response to DNA breaks. A similar situation exists in meiotic cells, as RAD51 and DMC1 colocalise to Spo11-induced DSBs during meiotic recombination ( Bishop, 1994 ; Tarsounas et al , 1999 ). Our observations of a novel DMC1 interaction site at BRCA2 2386–2411 , located away from the BRC repeats that mediate the primary interactions with RAD51, lead us to speculate that BRCA2 is capable of coordinately binding RAD51 and DMC1 to form a BRCA2-RAD51-DMC1 complex, which may facilitate the localisation of both recombinases to DNA break sites at the initiation of meiotic recombination. There, as in mitotic cells, it is likely that BRCA2 may participate in nucleoprotein filament formation leading to subsequent repair.
