---
pmid: '17449867'
title: Interaction of Epe1 with the heterochromatin assembly pathway in Schizosaccharomyces
  pombe.
authors:
- Isaac S
- Walfridsson J
- Zohar T
- Lazar D
- Kahan T
- Ekwall K
- Cohen A
journal: Genetics
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1855143
doi: 10.1534/genetics.106.068684
---

# Interaction of Epe1 with the heterochromatin assembly pathway in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
**Authors:** Isaac S, Walfridsson J, Zohar T, Lazar D, Kahan T, Ekwall K, Cohen A
**Journal:** Genetics (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1534/genetics.106.068684](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.106.068684)
**PMC:** [PMC1855143](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1855143/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2007 Apr;175(4):1549-60. doi: 10.1534/genetics.106.068684.

Interaction of Epe1 with the heterochromatin assembly pathway in 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Isaac S(1), Walfridsson J, Zohar T, Lazar D, Kahan T, Ekwall K, Cohen A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical 
School, Jerusalem, Israel 91010.

Epe1 is a JmjC domain protein that antagonizes heterochromatization in 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Related JmjC domain proteins catalyze a histone 
demethylation reaction that depends on Fe(II) and alpha-ketoglutarate. However, 
no detectable demethylase activity is associated with Epe1, and its JmjC domain 
lacks conservation of Fe(II)-binding residues. We report that Swi6 recruits Epe1 
to heterochromatin and that overexpression of epe1+, like mutations in silencing 
genes or overexpression of swi6+, upregulates expression of certain genes. A 
significant overlap was observed between the lists of genes that are upregulated 
by overexpression of epe1+ and those that are upregulated by mutations in 
histone deacetylase genes. However, most of the common genes are not regulated 
by Clr4 histone methyltransferase. This suggests that Epe1 interacts with the 
heterochromatin assembly pathway at the stage of histone deacetylation. 
Mutational inactivation of Epe1 downregulates approximately 12% of S. pombe 
genes, and the list of these genes overlaps significantly with the lists of 
genes that are upregulated by mutations in silencing genes and genes that are 
hyperacetylated at their promoter regions in clr6-1 mutants. We propose that an 
interplay between the repressive HDACs activity and Epe1 helps to regulate gene 
expression in S. pombe.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.106.068684
PMCID: PMC1855143
PMID: 17449867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Epe1 is a JmjC domain protein that antagonizes heterochromatization in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Related JmjC domain proteins catalyze a histone demethylation reaction that depends on Fe(II) and α-ketoglutarate. However, no detectable demethylase activity is associated with Epe1, and its JmjC domain lacks conservation of Fe(II)-binding residues. We report that Swi6 recruits Epe1 to heterochromatin and that overexpression of epe1 + , like mutations in silencing genes or overexpression of swi6 + , upregulates expression of certain genes. A significant overlap was observed between the lists of genes that are upregulated by overexpression of epe1 + and those that are upregulated by mutations in histone deacetylase genes. However, most of the common genes are not regulated by Clr4 histone methyltransferase. This suggests that Epe1 interacts with the heterochromatin assembly pathway at the stage of histone deacetylation. Mutational inactivation of Epe1 downregulates ∼12% of S. pombe genes, and the list of these genes overlaps significantly with the lists of genes that are upregulated by mutations in silencing genes and genes that are hyperacetylated at their promoter regions in clr6-1 mutants. We propose that an interplay between the repressive HDACs activity and Epe1 helps to regulate gene expression in S. pombe.

DISCUSSION

Epe1 was first identified as a JmjC domain protein that modulates heterochromatization ( A youb et al. 2003 ). However, the mechanism underlying Epe1 activity remained elusive. Here we report that Swi6 recruits Epe1 to constitutive heterochromatin domains and that overexpression of epe1 + , like mutational inactivation of silencing genes and overexpression of swi6 + , upregulates expression of S. pombe genes. We also report that mutational inactivation of Epe1 downregulates low-expression genes and genes that are upregulated in meiosis and stress conditions. The significant overlap between the lists of genes that are upregulated by overexpression of epe1 + and by mutations in HDAC genes, but not by a clr4 mutation, suggests that Epe1 interacts with the heterochromatin assembly pathway at the stage of histone deacetylation. Furthermore, the observation that a significant proportion of the genes that are upregulated by mutations in HDAC genes are downregulated by an epe1 mutation suggests that Epe1 may modulate the repressive effect of HDACs in logarithmically growing cells.
