---
pmid: '16774994'
title: Induction and prepatterning of the zebrafish pectoral fin bud requires axial
  retinoic acid signaling.
authors:
- Gibert Y
- Gajewski A
- Meyer A
- Begemann G
journal: Development
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.02438
---

# Induction and prepatterning of the zebrafish pectoral fin bud requires axial retinoic acid signaling.
**Authors:** Gibert Y, Gajewski A, Meyer A, Begemann G
**Journal:** Development (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.02438](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.02438)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2006 Jul;133(14):2649-59. doi: 10.1242/dev.02438. Epub 2006 Jun
14.

Induction and prepatterning of the zebrafish pectoral fin bud requires axial 
retinoic acid signaling.

Gibert Y(1), Gajewski A, Meyer A, Begemann G.

Author information:
(1)Lehrstuhl für Zoologie und Evolutionsbiologie, Department of Biology, 
University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.

Vertebrate forelimbs arise as bilateral appendages from the lateral plate 
mesoderm (LPM). Mutants in aldh1a2 (raldh2), an embryonically expressed gene 
encoding a retinoic acid (RA)-synthesizing enzyme, have been used to show that 
limb development and patterning of the limb bud are crucially dependent on RA 
signaling. However, the timing and cellular origin of RA signaling in these 
processes have remained poorly resolved. We have used genetics and chemical 
modulators of RA signaling to resolve these issues in the zebrafish. By rescuing 
pectoral fin induction in the aldh1a2/neckless mutant with exogenous RA and by 
blocking RA signaling in wild-type embryos, we find that RA acts as a permissive 
signal that is required during the six- to eight-somite stages for pectoral fin 
induction. Cell-transplantation experiments show that RA production is not only 
crucially required from flanking somites, but is sufficient to permit fin bud 
initiation when the trunk mesoderm is genetically ablated. Under the latter 
condition, intermediate mesoderm alone cannot induce the pectoral fin field in 
the LPM. We further show that induction of the fin field is directly followed by 
a continued requirement for somite-derived RA signaling to establish a 
prepattern of anteroposterior fates in the condensing fin mesenchyme. This 
process is mediated by the maintained expression of the transcription factor 
hand2, through which the fin field is continuously posteriorized, and lasts up 
to several hours prior to limb-budding. Thus, RA signaling from flanking somites 
plays a dual early role in the condensing limb bud mesenchyme.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.02438
PMID: 16774994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
