---
pmid: '12890688'
title: The BRCA1/BARD1 heterodimer assembles polyubiquitin chains through an unconventional
  linkage involving lysine residue K6 of ubiquitin.
authors:
- Wu-Baer F
- Lagrazon K
- Yuan W
- Baer R
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.C300249200
---

# The BRCA1/BARD1 heterodimer assembles polyubiquitin chains through an unconventional linkage involving lysine residue K6 of ubiquitin.
**Authors:** Wu-Baer F, Lagrazon K, Yuan W, Baer R
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.C300249200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C300249200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 12;278(37):34743-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C300249200. Epub
2003  Jul 30.

The BRCA1/BARD1 heterodimer assembles polyubiquitin chains through an 
unconventional linkage involving lysine residue K6 of ubiquitin.

Wu-Baer F(1), Lagrazon K, Yuan W, Baer R.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Department of Pathology, Columbia University, 
New York, New York 10032, USA.

The BRCA1 tumor suppressor forms a heterodimer with the BARD1 protein, and the 
resulting complex functions as an E3 ubiquitin ligase that catalyzes the 
synthesis of polyubiquitin chains. In theory, polyubiquitination can occur by 
isopeptide bond formation at any of the seven lysine residues of ubiquitin. The 
isopeptide linkage of a polyubiquitin chain is a particularly important 
determinant of its cellular function, such that K48-linked chains commonly 
target proteins for proteasomal degradation, while K63 chains serve 
non-proteolytic roles in various signaling pathways. To determine the isopeptide 
linkage formed by BRCA1/BARD1-dependent polyubiquitination, we purified a 
full-length heterodimeric complex and compared its linkage specificity with that 
of E6-AP, an E3 ligase known to induce proteolysis of its cellular substrates. 
Using a comprehensive mutation analysis, we found that E6-AP catalyzes the 
synthesis of K48-linked polyubiquitin chains. In contrast, however, the 
BRCA1/BARD1 heterodimer directs polymerization of ubiquitin primarily through an 
unconventional linkage involving lysine residue K6. Although heterologous 
substrates of BRCA1/BARD1 are not known, BRCA1 autoubiquitination occurs 
principally by conjugation with K6-linked polymers. The ability of BRCA1/BARD1 
to form K6-linked polyubiquitin chains suggests that it may impart unique 
cellular properties to its natural enzymatic substrates.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C300249200
PMID: 12890688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
