---
pmid: '39775849'
title: A protein interaction map of the myosin Myo2 reveals a role for Alo1 in mitochondrial
  inheritance in yeast.
authors:
- Chelius X
- Rausch N
- Bartosch V
- Klecker M
- Klecker T
- Westermann B
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2025'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.263678
---

# A protein interaction map of the myosin Myo2 reveals a role for Alo1 in mitochondrial inheritance in yeast.
**Authors:** Chelius X, Rausch N, Bartosch V, Klecker M, Klecker T, Westermann B
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.263678](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.263678)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2025 Feb 1;138(3):JCS263678. doi: 10.1242/jcs.263678. Epub 2025
Feb  6.

A protein interaction map of the myosin Myo2 reveals a role for Alo1 in 
mitochondrial inheritance in yeast.

Chelius X(1), Rausch N(1), Bartosch V(1), Klecker M(2), Klecker T(1), Westermann 
B(1).

Author information:
(1)Zellbiologie, Universität Bayreuth, 95440 Bayreuth, Germany.
(2)Pflanzenphysiologie, Universität Bayreuth, 95440 Bayreuth, Germany.

Budding yeast cells multiply by asymmetric cell division. During this process, 
the cell organelles are transported by myosin motors along the actin 
cytoskeleton into the growing bud, and, at the same time, some organelles must 
be retained in the mother cell. The ordered partitioning of organelles depends 
on highly regulated binding of motor proteins to cargo membranes. To search for 
novel components involved in this process, we performed a protein fragment 
complementation screen using the cargo-binding domain of Myo2, the major 
organelle transporter in yeast, as bait and a genome-wide strain collection 
expressing yeast proteins as prey. One robust hit was Alo1, a poorly 
characterized D-arabinono-1,4-lactone oxidase located in the mitochondrial outer 
membrane. We found that mutants lacking Alo1 exhibited defects in mitochondrial 
morphology and inheritance. During oxidative stress, dysfunctional mitochondria 
are immobilized in the mother in wild-type cells. Intriguingly, overexpression 
of ALO1 restored bud-directed transport of mitochondria under these conditions. 
We propose that Alo1 supports the recruitment of Myo2 to mitochondria and its 
activity is particularly important under oxidative stress.

© 2025. Published by The Company of Biologists.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.263678
PMID: 39775849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.
