---
pmid: '15265711'
title: BARD1 regulates BRCA1 apoptotic function by a mechanism involving nuclear retention.
authors:
- Fabbro M
- Schuechner S
- Au WW
- Henderson BR
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2004.05.004
---

# BARD1 regulates BRCA1 apoptotic function by a mechanism involving nuclear retention.
**Authors:** Fabbro M, Schuechner S, Au WW, Henderson BR
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yexcr.2004.05.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2004.05.004)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 2004 Aug 15;298(2):661-73. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2004.05.004.

BARD1 regulates BRCA1 apoptotic function by a mechanism involving nuclear 
retention.

Fabbro M(1), Schuechner S, Au WW, Henderson BR.

Author information:
(1)Westmead Institute for Cancer Research, Westmead Millennium Institute at 
Westmead Hospital, University of Sydney, Westmead, 2145 New South Wales, 
Australia.

BRCA1 is involved in maintaining genomic integrity and, as a regulator of the 
G2/M checkpoint, contributes to DNA repair and cell survival. The overexpression 
of BRCA1 elicits diverse cellular responses including apoptosis due to the 
stimulation of specific signaling pathways. BRCA1 is normally regulated by 
protein turnover, but is stabilized by BARD1 which can recruit BRCA1 to the 
nucleus to form a ubiquitin E3 ligase complex involved in DNA repair or cell 
survival. Here, we identify BARD1 as a regulator of BRCA1-dependent apoptosis. 
Using transfected MCF-7 breast cancer cells, we found that BRCA1-induced 
apoptosis was independent of p53 and was stimulated by BRCA1 nuclear export. 
Conversely, BARD1 reduced BRCA1-dependent apoptosis by a mechanism involving 
nuclear sequestration. Regulation of apoptosis by BARD1 was reduced by BRCA1 
cancer mutations that disrupt Ub ligase function. Transfection of BRCA1 
N-terminal peptides that disrupted the cellular BRCA1-BARD1 interaction caused a 
loss of nuclear BRCA1 that correlated with increased apoptosis in single cell 
assays, but did not alter localization or expression of endogenous BARD1. 
Reducing BARD1 levels by siRNA caused a small increase in apoptosis. Our 
findings identify a novel apoptosis inhibitory function of BARD1 and suggest 
that nuclear retention of BRCA1-BARD1 complexes contributes to both DNA repair 
and cell survival.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2004.05.004
PMID: 15265711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
