---
pmid: '25416956'
title: A proteome-scale map of the human interactome network.
authors:
- Rolland T
- Taşan M
- Charloteaux B
- Pevzner SJ
- Zhong Q
- Sahni N
- Yi S
- Lemmens I
- Fontanillo C
- Mosca R
- Kamburov A
- Ghiassian SD
- Yang X
- Ghamsari L
- Balcha D
- Begg BE
- Braun P
- Brehme M
- Broly MP
- Carvunis AR
- Convery-Zupan D
- Corominas R
- Coulombe-Huntington J
- Dann E
- Dreze M
- Dricot A
- Fan C
- Franzosa E
- Gebreab F
- Gutierrez BJ
- Hardy MF
- Jin M
- Kang S
- Kiros R
- Lin GN
- Luck K
- MacWilliams A
- Menche J
- Murray RR
- Palagi A
- Poulin MM
- Rambout X
- Rasla J
- Reichert P
- Romero V
- Ruyssinck E
- Sahalie JM
- Scholz A
- Shah AA
- Sharma A
- Shen Y
- Spirohn K
- Tam S
- Tejeda AO
- Wanamaker SA
- Twizere JC
- Vega K
- Walsh J
- Cusick ME
- Xia Y
- Barabási AL
- Iakoucheva LM
- Aloy P
- De Las Rivas J
- Tavernier J
- Calderwood MA
- Hill DE
- Hao T
- Roth FP
- Vidal M
journal: Cell
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4266588
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.10.050
---

# A proteome-scale map of the human interactome network.
**Authors:** Rolland T, Taşan M, Charloteaux B, Pevzner SJ, Zhong Q, Sahni N, Yi S, Lemmens I, Fontanillo C, Mosca R, Kamburov A, Ghiassian SD, Yang X, Ghamsari L, Balcha D, Begg BE, Braun P, Brehme M, Broly MP, Carvunis AR, Convery-Zupan D, Corominas R, Coulombe-Huntington J, Dann E, Dreze M, Dricot A, Fan C, Franzosa E, Gebreab F, Gutierrez BJ, Hardy MF, Jin M, Kang S, Kiros R, Lin GN, Luck K, MacWilliams A, Menche J, Murray RR, Palagi A, Poulin MM, Rambout X, Rasla J, Reichert P, Romero V, Ruyssinck E, Sahalie JM, Scholz A, Shah AA, Sharma A, Shen Y, Spirohn K, Tam S, Tejeda AO, Wanamaker SA, Twizere JC, Vega K, Walsh J, Cusick ME, Xia Y, Barabási AL, Iakoucheva LM, Aloy P, De Las Rivas J, Tavernier J, Calderwood MA, Hill DE, Hao T, Roth FP, Vidal M
**Journal:** Cell (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2014.10.050](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.10.050)
**PMC:** [PMC4266588](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4266588/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2014 Nov 20;159(5):1212-1226. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.10.050.

A proteome-scale map of the human interactome network.

Rolland T(1), Taşan M(2), Charloteaux B(1), Pevzner SJ(3), Zhong Q(4), Sahni 
N(1), Yi S(1), Lemmens I(5), Fontanillo C(6), Mosca R(7), Kamburov A(1), 
Ghiassian SD(8), Yang X(1), Ghamsari L(1), Balcha D(1), Begg BE(1), Braun P(1), 
Brehme M(1), Broly MP(1), Carvunis AR(1), Convery-Zupan D(1), Corominas R(9), 
Coulombe-Huntington J(10), Dann E(1), Dreze M(1), Dricot A(1), Fan C(1), 
Franzosa E(10), Gebreab F(1), Gutierrez BJ(1), Hardy MF(1), Jin M(1), Kang S(9), 
Kiros R(1), Lin GN(9), Luck K(1), MacWilliams A(1), Menche J(8), Murray RR(1), 
Palagi A(1), Poulin MM(1), Rambout X(11), Rasla J(1), Reichert P(1), Romero 
V(1), Ruyssinck E(5), Sahalie JM(1), Scholz A(1), Shah AA(1), Sharma A(8), Shen 
Y(1), Spirohn K(1), Tam S(1), Tejeda AO(1), Wanamaker SA(1), Twizere JC(11), 
Vega K(1), Walsh J(1), Cusick ME(1), Xia Y(10), Barabási AL(12), Iakoucheva 
LM(9), Aloy P(13), De Las Rivas J(6), Tavernier J(5), Calderwood MA(1), Hill 
DE(1), Hao T(1), Roth FP(14), Vidal M(15).

Author information:
(1)Center for Cancer Systems Biology (CCSB) and Department of Cancer Biology, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Genetics, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Center for Cancer Systems Biology (CCSB) and Department of Cancer Biology, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Departments of Molecular 
Genetics and Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, 
Canada; Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, Canada; 
Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON M5G 
1X5, Canada.
(3)Center for Cancer Systems Biology (CCSB) and Department of Cancer Biology, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Genetics, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Biomedical 
Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Boston University School 
of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA.
(4)Center for Cancer Systems Biology (CCSB) and Department of Cancer Biology, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Genetics, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Biological 
Sciences, Wright State University, Dayton, OH 45435, USA.
(5)Department of Medical Protein Research, VIB, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(6)Cancer Research Center (Centro de Investigación del Cancer), University of 
Salamanca and Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Salamanca 37008, 
Spain.
(7)Joint IRB-BSC Program in Computational Biology, Institute for Research in 
Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), Barcelona 08028, Spain.
(8)Center for Cancer Systems Biology (CCSB) and Department of Cancer Biology, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Center for Complex Network 
Research (CCNR) and Department of Physics, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 
02115, USA.
(9)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92093, USA.
(10)Center for Cancer Systems Biology (CCSB) and Department of Cancer Biology, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of 
Bioengineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 0C3, Canada.
(11)Center for Cancer Systems Biology (CCSB) and Department of Cancer Biology, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Genetics, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Protein Signaling and 
Interactions Lab, GIGA-R, University of Liege, 4000 Liege, Belgium.
(12)Center for Cancer Systems Biology (CCSB) and Department of Cancer Biology, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Center for Complex Network 
Research (CCNR) and Department of Physics, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 
02115, USA; Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(13)Joint IRB-BSC Program in Computational Biology, Institute for Research in 
Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), Barcelona 08028, Spain; Institució Catalana de 
Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona 08010, Spain.
(14)Center for Cancer Systems Biology (CCSB) and Department of Cancer Biology, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Departments of Molecular 
Genetics and Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, 
Canada; Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, Canada; 
Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON M5G 
1X5, Canada; Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Toronto M5G 1Z8, Canada. 
Electronic address: fritz.roth@utoronto.ca.
(15)Center for Cancer Systems Biology (CCSB) and Department of Cancer Biology, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Genetics, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: 
marc_vidal@dfci.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Methods. 2015 Feb;12(2):107. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.3276.

Just as reference genome sequences revolutionized human genetics, reference maps 
of interactome networks will be critical to fully understand genotype-phenotype 
relationships. Here, we describe a systematic map of ?14,000 high-quality human 
binary protein-protein interactions. At equal quality, this map is ?30% larger 
than what is available from small-scale studies published in the literature in 
the last few decades. While currently available information is highly biased and 
only covers a relatively small portion of the proteome, our systematic map 
appears strikingly more homogeneous, revealing a "broader" human interactome 
network than currently appreciated. The map also uncovers significant 
interconnectivity between known and candidate cancer gene products, providing 
unbiased evidence for an expanded functional cancer landscape, while 
demonstrating how high-quality interactome models will help "connect the dots" 
of the genomic revolution.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.10.050
PMCID: PMC4266588
PMID: 25416956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Since the release of a high-quality human genome sequence a decade ago ( International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium,
2004 ), our ability to assign genotypes to phenotypes has exploded. Genes
have been identified for most Mendelian disorders ( Hamosh et al., 2005 ) and over one hundred thousand alleles have been
implicated in at least one disorder ( Stenson et al.,
2014 ). Hundreds of susceptibility loci have been uncovered for numerous
complex traits ( Hindorff et al., 2009 ) and
the genomes of a few thousand human tumors have been nearly fully sequenced ( Chin et al., 2011 ). This genomic revolution is
poised to generate a complete description of all relevant genotypic variations in
the human population.

Genomic sequencing will however, if performed in isolation, leave fundamental
questions pertaining to genotype-phenotype relationships unresolved ( Vidal et al., 2011 ). The causal changes that
connect genotype to phenotype remain generally unknown, especially for complex trait
loci and cancer-associated mutations. Even when identified, it is often unclear how
a causal mutation perturbs the function of the corresponding gene or gene product.
To “connect the dots” of the genomic revolution, functions and
context must be assigned to large numbers of genotypic changes.

Complex cellular systems formed by interactions among genes and gene
products, or interactome networks, appear to underlie most cellular functions ( Vidal et al., 2011 ). Thus, a full understanding
of genotype-phenotype relationships in human will require mechanistic descriptions
of how interactome networks are perturbed as a result of inherited and somatic
disease susceptibilities. This in turn will require high quality and extensive
genome and proteome-scale maps of macromolecular interactions such as
protein-protein interactions (PPIs), protein-nucleic acid interactions, and
post-translational modifiers and their targets.

First-generation binary PPI interactome maps ( Rual et al., 2005 ; Stelzl et al.,
2005 ) have already provided network-based explanations for some
genotype-phenotype relationships, but they remain incomplete and of insufficient
quality to derive accurate global interpretations ( Figure S1A ). There is a dire
need for empirically-controlled ( Venkatesan et al.,
2009 ) high-quality proteome-scale interactome reference maps, reminiscent
of the high-quality reference genome sequence that revolutionized human
genetics.

The challenges are manifold. Even considering only one splice variant per
gene, approximately 20,000 protein-coding genes ( Kim
et al., 2014 ; Wilhelm et al.,
2014 ) must be handled and ~200 million protein pairs tested to
generate a comprehensive binary reference PPI map. Whether such a comprehensive
network could ever be mapped by the collective efforts of small-scale studies
remains uncertain. Computational predictions of protein interactions can generate
information at proteome scale ( Zhang et al.,
2012 ) but are inherently limited by biases in currently available
knowledge used to infer such interactome models. Should interactome maps be
generated for all individual human tissues using biochemical co-complex association
data, or would ‘context-free’ information on direct binary
biophysical interaction for all possible PPIs be preferable? To what extent would
these approaches be complementary? Even with nearly complete, high-quality reference
interactome maps of biophysical interactions, how can the biological relevance of
each interaction be evaluated under physiological conditions? Here, we begin to
address these questions by generating a proteome-scale map of the human binary
interactome and comparing it to alternative network maps.

DISCUSSION

By systematically screening half of the interactome space with minimal
inspection bias, we more than doubled the number of high-quality binary PPIs
available from the literature. Covering zones of the human interactome landscape
that have been weakly charted by other approaches, our systematic binary map
provides deeper functional context to thousands of proteins, as demonstrated for
candidates identified in unbiased cancer genomic screens. Systematic binary mapping
therefore stands as a powerful approach to “connect the dots” of the
genomic revolution.

Combining high-quality binary pairs from the literature with systematic
binary maps, 30,000 high-confidence interactions are now available. It is likely
that a large proportion of the human interactome can soon be mapped by taking
advantage of the emergence of reference proteome maps ( Kim et al., 2014 ; Wilhelm et
al., 2014 ), a combination of nearly complete clone collections ( Yang et al., 2011 ), rapid improvements in Y2H
assay sensitivity and emerging interaction-mapping technologies that drastically
reduce cost ( Caufield et al., 2012 ; Stagljar and Fields, 2002 ; Yu et al., 2011 ).

Reference binary interactome maps of increased coverage and quality will be
required to interpret condition-specific interactions and to characterize the
effects of splicing and genetic variation on interactions ( Zhong et al., 2009 ). While protein-protein interactions
represent an important class of interactions between macromolecules, future efforts
integrating this information with protein-DNA, protein-RNA, RNA-RNA or
protein-metabolite interactions will provide a unified view of the molecular
interactions governing cell behaviour. Just as a reference genome enabled detailed
maps of human genetic variation ( 1000 Genomes Project
Consortium, 2012 ), completion of a reference interactome network map will
enable deeper insight into genotype-phenotype relationships in human.
