---
pmid: '10713156'
title: Nedd8 modification of cul-1 activates SCF(beta(TrCP))-dependent ubiquitination
  of IkappaBalpha.
authors:
- Read MA
- Brownell JE
- Gladysheva TB
- Hottelet M
- Parent LA
- Coggins MB
- Pierce JW
- Podust VN
- Luo RS
- Chau V
- Palombella VJ
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC85397
doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.7.2326-2333.2000
---

# Nedd8 modification of cul-1 activates SCF(beta(TrCP))-dependent ubiquitination of IkappaBalpha.
**Authors:** Read MA, Brownell JE, Gladysheva TB, Hottelet M, Parent LA, Coggins MB, Pierce JW, Podust VN, Luo RS, Chau V, Palombella VJ
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.20.7.2326-2333.2000](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.20.7.2326-2333.2000)
**PMC:** [PMC85397](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC85397/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Apr;20(7):2326-33. doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.7.2326-2333.2000.

Nedd8 modification of cul-1 activates SCF(beta(TrCP))-dependent ubiquitination 
of IkappaBalpha.

Read MA(1), Brownell JE, Gladysheva TB, Hottelet M, Parent LA, Coggins MB, 
Pierce JW, Podust VN, Luo RS, Chau V, Palombella VJ.

Author information:
(1)LeukoSite, Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA. mread@mpi.com

Regulation of NF-kappaB occurs through phosphorylation-dependent ubiquitination 
of IkappaBalpha, which is degraded by the 26S proteasome. Recent studies have 
shown that ubiquitination of IkappaBalpha is carried out by a ubiquitin-ligase 
enzyme complex called SCF(beta(TrCP)). Here we show that Nedd8 modification of 
the Cul-1 component of SCF(beta(TrCP)) is important for function of 
SCF(beta(TrCP)) in ubiquitination of IkappaBalpha. In cells, Nedd8-conjugated 
Cul-1 was complexed with two substrates of SCF(beta(TrCP)), phosphorylated 
IkappaBalpha and beta-catenin, indicating that Nedd8-Cul-1 conjugates are part 
of SCF(beta(TrCP)) in vivo. Although only a minute fraction of total cellular 
Cul-1 is modified by Nedd8, the Cul-1 associated with ectopically expressed 
betaTrCP was highly enriched for the Nedd8-conjugated form. Moreover, optimal 
ubiquitination of IkappaBalpha required Nedd8 and the Nedd8-conjugating enzyme, 
Ubc12. The site of Nedd8 ligation to Cul-1 is essential, as SCF(beta(TrCP)) 
containing a K720R mutant of Cul-1 only weakly supported IkappaBalpha 
ubiquitination compared to SCF(beta(TrCP)) containing WT Cul-1, suggesting that 
the Nedd8 ligation of Cul-1 affects the ubiquitination activity of 
SCF(beta(TrCP)). These observations provide a functional link between the highly 
related ubiquitin and Nedd8 pathways of protein modification and show how they 
operate together to selectively target the signal-dependent degradation of 
IkappaBalpha.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.20.7.2326-2333.2000
PMCID: PMC85397
PMID: 10713156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Regulation of NF-κB occurs through phosphorylation-dependent ubiquitination of IκBα, which is degraded by the 26S proteasome. Recent studies have shown that ubiquitination of IκBα is carried out by a ubiquitin-ligase enzyme complex called SCF β TrCP . Here we show that Nedd8 modification of the Cul-1 component of SCF β TrCP is important for function of SCF β TrCP in ubiquitination of IκBα. In cells, Nedd8-conjugated Cul-1 was complexed with two substrates of SCF β TrCP , phosphorylated IκBα and β-catenin, indicating that Nedd8–Cul-1 conjugates are part of SCF β TrCP in vivo. Although only a minute fraction of total cellular Cul-1 is modified by Nedd8, the Cul-1 associated with ectopically expressed βTrCP was highly enriched for the Nedd8-conjugated form. Moreover, optimal ubiquitination of IκBα required Nedd8 and the Nedd8-conjugating enzyme, Ubc12. The site of Nedd8 ligation to Cul-1 is essential, as SCF β TrCP containing a K720R mutant of Cul-1 only weakly supported IκBα ubiquitination compared to SCF β TrCP containing WT Cul-1, suggesting that the Nedd8 ligation of Cul-1 affects the ubiquitination activity of SCF β TrCP . These observations provide a functional link between the highly related ubiquitin and Nedd8 pathways of protein modification and show how they operate together to selectively target the signal-dependent degradation of IκBα.

DISCUSSION

Several recent studies have shown that SCF β TrCP functions as a ubiquitin ligase (E3) responsible for phosphorylation-dependent ubiquitination of IκBα ( 11 , 17 , 28 , 53 , 55 , 63 , 65 ). In this report, we present several lines of evidence that Nedd8 modification of Cul-1 and Nedd8-conjugating activity enhance the IκBα ubiquitination activity of SCF β TrCP . First, although only a small portion of the total cellular pool of Cul-1 is modified by Nedd8, Nedd8-Cul-1 was the only form detected in association with the SCF β TrCP substrates phosphorylated IκBα and β-catenin in vivo. Second, a significant portion of endogenous Cul-1 associated with ectopically expressed βTrCP was modified by Nedd8. Third, Ubc12-dependent Nedd8-conjugating activity, in addition to ubiquitin-conjugating activity, was required for robust ubiquitination of IκBα by SCF β TrCP in vitro. Moreover, an active-site mutant of Ubc12 was a potent inhibitor of IκBα ubiquitination. Finally, IκBα ubiquitination activity of SCF β TrCP was stimulated in the presence of Nedd8 pathway components. In contrast, SCF β TrCP assembled with a mutant Cul-1 (K720R) that does not form conjugates with Nedd8 was significantly less active than the WT enzyme and was not stimulated in the presence of the Nedd8 pathway. Taken together, our results suggest that Nedd8 conjugation of Cul-1 has profound effects on SCF β TrCP ubiquitination activity, linking the Nedd8 and ubiquitin pathways in the signal dependent degradation of IκBα (Fig. 6 ).

Our experiments suggest that Nedd8 conjugation of Cul-1 is important for the function of SCF β TrCP but is not essential for detecting ubiquitination activity in vitro (Fig. 4 B and 5 ). These results are reminiscent of recent studies in which SCF β TrCP activity was reconstituted in the absence of exogenous Nedd8 pathway components ( 53 , 65 ). While the status of Nedd8–Cul-1 conjugation was not examined in these studies, in light of our findings, at least some portion of the Cul-1 was likely modified by Nedd8. We found that the IκBα ubiquitination activity both in cellular extracts and in isolated SCF β TrCP was significantly enhanced in the presence of the Nedd8 pathway. We also noted that a portion of the WT Cul-1 in immunoprecipitated SCF β TrCP was conjugated to Nedd8 in vivo and that Nedd8–Cul-1 levels increased in reactions containing Nedd8 pathway components, an effect coincident with increasing IκBα ubiquitination activity (Fig. 4 ).

SCF complexes are implicated in the regulated proteolysis of a growing number of cellular proteins. Recent reports have added the R-box proteins, Rbx-1 (Roc1), Rbx-2, and APC11, as members of SCF and related E3 complexes and have begun to shed light on the mechanism by which these enzymes recognize target substrates and catalyze the formation of Ub conjugates ( 25 , 43 , 50 , 52 , 56 ) and Nedd8 conjugates ( 26 ). Cul-1 and related cullin proteins are known to form conjugates with Nedd8 ( 60 ). How Nedd8 conjugation of the cullin proteins impinges on the association and/or activity of these factors with the core components of the SCF and related complexes is not known. Our analysis of SCF β TrCP using coimmunoprecipitation experiments showed that the associations of β-TrCP, Skp-1, and Roc1 with either FLAG-tagged WT or K720R Cul-1 were indistinguishable (Fig. 5 B). Moreover, the ability to form Nedd8–Cul-1 conjugates had no obvious affect on the affinity of SCF β TrCP for phosphorylated IκBα, as the apparent K m for this substrate was similar for both forms of the enzyme. The striking difference in ubiquitination activity observed for SCF β TrCP containing WT or K720R Cul-1 could reflect a role for Nedd8 modification in altering the conformation of Cul-1 in a manner that does not grossly affect interaction with other SCF components or substrate but does stimulate ubiquitin transfer. While this report was in preparation, two reports describing Nedd8 conjugation of Cul-2 in an SCF-related E3 ligase (see below) called the von Hippel Lindau-elonginB/C (VBC) complex were published ( 34 , 61 ). Neither report addressed a role for Nedd8–Cul-2 in ubiquitination activity; however, both showed that formation of Nedd8–Cul-2 in vivo was dependent on the integrity of the VBC complex. Moreover, Wada et al. ( 61 ) speculated that differences in their ability to immunoprecipitate WT versus a mutant form of Cul-2 that is analogous to K720R Cul-1 could reflect a conformational effect of forming the Nedd8 conjugate.

SCF complexes, along with the VBC and other cullin-containing complexes, are members of a proposed superfamily of ubiquitin ligases (E3s) (for a review, see reference 58 ). These complexes share a common architecture which includes the presence of cullin-like and R-box proteins at the core. Cul-1 and related cullin proteins are the only components of these complexes known to form conjugates with Nedd8. Since K720 and the surrounding sequence in Cul-1 is conserved in all cullin proteins (Fig. 3 A), and since all cullin proteins tested to date can be modified by a single Nedd8 molecule ( 44 , 60 ), it seems likely that the requirement for Nedd8 modification at this site will also be a common feature of all cullin protein-containing complexes. This raises the intriguing possibility that formation of Nedd8 conjugates represents a novel and universal mechanism for regulating the activity of SCF and other cullin-containing complexes. Thus, regulation of Nedd8 levels, and/or the associated Nedd8-activating enzyme and E2 activities, may play a fundamental role in controlling levels of key protein targets of these E3s under different physiological states. This idea is supported by the fact that Nedd8 is differentially expressed in a variety of tissue types and is down regulated during cellular differentiation ( 24 , 29 ).

This study demonstrates that the Cul-1 component of SCF β TrCP is decorated with a single Nedd8 molecule when it is part of an active SCF β TrCP complex engaged with its cellular substrates, phosphorylated IκBα and β-catenin (Fig. 6 ). While the role of the Nedd8 modification in any biological function has been elusive, the involvement of Nedd8 in SCF-mediated ubiquitination links these two highly related pathways of protein modification. Both pathways are required to ultimately result in degradation of a phosphorylated substrate. Inhibition of the Nedd8-activating pathway in cells could reveal additional pathways where this modification exerts a regulatory role.
