---
pmid: '20150422'
title: Processing of meiotic DNA double strand breaks requires cyclin-dependent kinase
  and multiple nucleases.
authors:
- Manfrini N
- Guerini I
- Citterio A
- Lucchini G
- Longhese MP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2857040
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.104083
---

# Processing of meiotic DNA double strand breaks requires cyclin-dependent kinase and multiple nucleases.
**Authors:** Manfrini N, Guerini I, Citterio A, Lucchini G, Longhese MP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.104083](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.104083)
**PMC:** [PMC2857040](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2857040/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 9;285(15):11628-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.104083. Epub 
2010 Feb 11.

Processing of meiotic DNA double strand breaks requires cyclin-dependent kinase 
and multiple nucleases.

Manfrini N(1), Guerini I, Citterio A, Lucchini G, Longhese MP.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie e Bioscienze, Università degli Studi di 
Milano-Bicocca, Piazza della Scienza 2, 20126 Milan, Italy.

Meiotic recombination requires the formation of programmed Spo11-dependent DNA 
double strand breaks (DSBs). In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the Sae2 protein and 
the Mre11-Rad50-Xrs2 complex are necessary to remove the covalently attached 
Spo11 protein from the DNA ends, which are then resected by so far unknown 
nucleases. Here, we demonstrate that phosphorylation of Sae2 Ser-267 by 
cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (Cdk1) is required to initiate meiotic DSB resection 
by allowing Spo11 removal from DSB ends. This finding suggests that Cdk1 
activity is required for the processing of Spo11-induced DSBs, thus providing a 
mechanism for coordinating DSB resection with progression through meiotic 
prophase. Furthermore, the helicase Sgs1 and the nucleases Exo1 and Dna2 
participate in lengthening the 5'-3' resection tracts during meiosis by 
controlling a step subsequent to Spo11 removal.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.104083
PMCID: PMC2857040
PMID: 20150422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Meiotic recombination requires the formation of programmed Spo11-dependent DNA double strand breaks (DSBs). In Saccharomyces cerevisiae , the Sae2 protein and the Mre11-Rad50-Xrs2 complex are necessary to remove the covalently attached Spo11 protein from the DNA ends, which are then resected by so far unknown nucleases. Here, we demonstrate that phosphorylation of Sae2 Ser-267 by cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (Cdk1) is required to initiate meiotic DSB resection by allowing Spo11 removal from DSB ends. This finding suggests that Cdk1 activity is required for the processing of Spo11-induced DSBs, thus providing a mechanism for coordinating DSB resection with progression through meiotic prophase. Furthermore, the helicase Sgs1 and the nucleases Exo1 and Dna2 participate in lengthening the 5′-3′ resection tracts during meiosis by controlling a step subsequent to Spo11 removal.

Introduction

During the first meiotic division, homologous maternal and paternal chromosomes are segregated. In most organisms, homologs must be physically connected to ensure their proper segregation ( 1 ). By virtue of cohesion between sister chromatids, the exchange of chromosome arms through chiasmata formation provides the physical connections between homologous chromosomes. Chiasmata are generated by recombination events, which are initiated by the formation of self-inflicted DNA double strand breaks (DSBs). 3

DSB formation requires meiosis-specific gene products, including the evolutionary conserved topoisomerase-like enzyme Spo11, as well as the three components of the MRX complex (Mre11-Rad50-Xrs2) ( 2 ). In particular, a Spo11 dimer coordinately breaks both DNA strands, creating a DSB with covalent linkages between the 5′ DNA ends and the catalytic tyrosine residue of each Spo11 monomer ( 3 ). Then, Spo11 must be removed by endonucleolytic cleavage to allow further DSB end processing by 5′-3′ resection that is required to initiate homologous recombination ( 4 ). This event is promoted by the Sae2 protein and the MRX complex, which are required to catalyze the endonucleolytic removal of Spo11-linked oligonucleotides ( 3 , 5 , 6 ). In fact, budding yeast sae2 Δ cells and rad50s separation-of-function mutants allow DSB formation but are totally defective in Spo11 removal from DSB ends ( 3 , 5 , 7 – 9 ). Similarly, mre11 alleles impairing Mre11 nuclease activity allow Spo11-induced DSB formation, but not Spo11 removal ( 10 – 12 ), suggesting that the latter may take place by Mre11-catalyzed endonucleolytic cleavage and that Sae2 participates in this process. As recently shown, also Sae2 exhibits an endonuclease activity ( 13 ), suggesting that this protein, possibly in cooperation with MRX, may allow Spo11 removal by mediating an endonucleolytic cleavage close to the DNA end.

Because DSBs are highly hazardous for genome stability, commitment to DSB resection and meiotic progression must be tightly regulated to ensure proper DSB repair. In vegetative Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells, DSB resection is promoted by the activity of the cyclin-dependent protein kinase Cdk1 (Cdc28/Clb) during the S and G 2 cell cycle phases ( 14 , 15 ). This control relies on the phosphorylation of Sae2 Ser-267 by Cdk1 ( 16 ), a mechanism that is conserved in the vertebrate homologue of Sae2, CtIP ( 17 , 18 ). Because Cdk1 activity is required to generate Spo11-induced DSBs ( 19 , 20 ), its involvement in allowing their processing has not been assessed.

After Spo11 removal from the 5′ DSB ends, one or more so far unknown nucleases have to resect the break to generate 3′-ended single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) overhangs to initiate homologous recombination. Candidates for such activity are the nucleases Exo1 and Dna2 and the helicase Sgs1, which all contribute to resect DSB and chromosome ends in mitotic S. cerevisiae cells ( 21 – 24 ). Consistent with this hypothesis, EXO1 deletion has been shown to impair repair of meiotic DSBs and to reduce meiotic crossing over ( 25 ).

Here we show that phosphorylation by Cdk1 of the Ser-267 residue of S. cerevisiae Sae2 is required to initiate resection of meiotic DSBs. In fact, substitution of Sae2 Ser-267 with a non-phosphorylatable residue severely impairs both Spo11 removal and DNA-end processing, which instead take place efficiently when an aspartic residue mimicking constitutive phosphorylation replaces Sae2 Ser-267. Moreover, we demonstrate that further processing of Spo11-induced DSB ends depends on the nuclease Exo1 and the helicase Sgs1 that act in two different pathways.

DISCUSSION

DNA DSBs are highly hazardous for genome integrity, but meiotic cells deliberately introduce them into their genome to initiate homologous recombination. To minimize the risk of deleterious effects, meiotic DSB formation, processing, and repair must be tightly regulated to occur only at the right time and place. In this work, we have investigated the mechanism by which S. cerevisiae cells control Spo11 removal and resection of meiosis-specific DSBs. Overall, our data indicate that the requirements for resecting Spo11-induced DSBs, in terms of nucleases and Cdk1-dependent Sae2 phosphorylation, are similar to those of the processing events at an accidental DSB, indicating that cells have evolved the same mechanism to process both programmed and un-programmed DSBs.
