---
pmid: '25574898'
title: Mutations in PNPLA6 are linked to photoreceptor degeneration and various forms
  of childhood blindness.
authors:
- Kmoch S
- Majewski J
- Ramamurthy V
- Cao S
- Fahiminiya S
- Ren H
- MacDonald IM
- Lopez I
- Sun V
- Keser V
- Khan A
- Stránecký V
- Hartmannová H
- Přistoupilová A
- Hodaňová K
- Piherová L
- Kuchař L
- Baxová A
- Chen R
- Barsottini OG
- Pyle A
- Griffin H
- Splitt M
- Sallum J
- Tolmie JL
- Sampson JR
- Chinnery P
- Care4Rare Canada
- Banin E
- Sharon D
- Dutta S
- Grebler R
- Helfrich-Foerster C
- Pedroso JL
- Kretzschmar D
- Cayouette M
- Koenekoop RK
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC4356490
doi: 10.1038/ncomms6614
---

# Mutations in PNPLA6 are linked to photoreceptor degeneration and various forms of childhood blindness.
**Authors:** Kmoch S, Majewski J, Ramamurthy V, Cao S, Fahiminiya S, Ren H, MacDonald IM, Lopez I, Sun V, Keser V, Khan A, Stránecký V, Hartmannová H, Přistoupilová A, Hodaňová K, Piherová L, Kuchař L, Baxová A, Chen R, Barsottini OG, Pyle A, Griffin H, Splitt M, Sallum J, Tolmie JL, Sampson JR, Chinnery P, Care4Rare Canada, Banin E, Sharon D, Dutta S, Grebler R, Helfrich-Foerster C, Pedroso JL, Kretzschmar D, Cayouette M, Koenekoop RK
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncomms6614](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms6614)
**PMC:** [PMC4356490](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4356490/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Commun. 2015 Jan 9;6:5614. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6614.

Mutations in PNPLA6 are linked to photoreceptor degeneration and various forms 
of childhood blindness.

Kmoch S(1), Majewski J(2), Ramamurthy V(3), Cao S(4), Fahiminiya S(2), Ren H(4), 
MacDonald IM(5), Lopez I(4), Sun V(4), Keser V(4), Khan A(4), Stránecký V(1), 
Hartmannová H(1), Přistoupilová A(1), Hodaňová K(1), Piherová L(1), Kuchař L(1), 
Baxová A(6), Chen R(7), Barsottini OG(8), Pyle A(9), Griffin H(9), Splitt M(9), 
Sallum J(10), Tolmie JL(11), Sampson JR(12), Chinnery P(9); Care4Rare Canada; 
Banin E(15), Sharon D(15), Dutta S(16), Grebler R(17), Helfrich-Foerster C(17), 
Pedroso JL(8), Kretzschmar D(16), Cayouette M(18), Koenekoop RK(4).

Collaborators: Boycott K(13), MacKenzie A(13), Brudno M(14), Bulman D(13), 
Dyment D(13).

Author information:
(1)First Faculty of Medicine, Institute for Inherited Metabolic Disorders, 
Charles University in Prague, 120 00 Prague 2, Czech Republic.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Human Genetics, McGill University and 
Genome Quebec Innovation Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 0G1.
(3)Cellular Neurobiology Research Unit, Institut de recherches cliniques de 
Montréal (IRCM), 110, Ave des Pins Ouest, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H2W 1R7.
(4)1] McGill University, 845 Sherbrooke Street West, Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
H3A 0G4 [2] McGill Ocular Genetics Laboratory; Departments of Paediatric 
Surgery, Human Genetics and Ophthalmology, Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill 
University Health Centre, 2300 Tupper, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3H 1P3.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Alberta/Royal 
Alexandra Hospital, 10240 Kingsway Avenue, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada AB T5H 3V9.
(6)First Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles 
University in Prague, 120 00 Prague 2, Czech Republic.
(7)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, 
Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
(8)Division of General Neurology and Ataxia Unit, Department of Neurology, 
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Sao Paulo 04021-001, Brazil.
(9)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 
3BZ, UK.
(10)Department of Ophthalmology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Sao Paulo 
04021-001, Brazil.
(11)Department of Clinical Genetics, Southern General Hospital, Glasgow G51 4TF, 
UK.
(12)Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University School of Medicine, 
Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK.
(13)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, University of 
Ottawa, 401 Smyth Road, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8L1.
(14)Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, 10 King's College 
Road, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3G4.
(15)Department of Ophthalmology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, 
Jerusalem 91120, Israel.
(16)Oregon Institute of Occupational Health Sciences, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA.
(17)Lehrstuhl fuer Neurobiology und Genetik, Universitaet Wuerzburg, 97074 
Wuerzburg, Germany.
(18)1] Cellular Neurobiology Research Unit, Institut de recherches cliniques de 
Montréal (IRCM), 110, Ave des Pins Ouest, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H2W 1R7 [2] 
Departement de Médecine, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3T 
1P1 [3] Division of Experimental Medicine, Department of Anatomy and Cell 
Biology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 2B2.

Blindness due to retinal degeneration affects millions of people worldwide, but 
many disease-causing mutations remain unknown. PNPLA6 encodes the patatin-like 
phospholipase domain containing protein 6, also known as neuropathy target 
esterase (NTE), which is the target of toxic organophosphates that induce human 
paralysis due to severe axonopathy of large neurons. Mutations in PNPLA6 also 
cause human spastic paraplegia characterized by motor neuron degeneration. Here 
we identify PNPLA6 mutations in childhood blindness in seven families with 
retinal degeneration, including Leber congenital amaurosis and Oliver McFarlane 
syndrome. PNPLA6 localizes mostly at the inner segment plasma membrane in 
photoreceptors and mutations in Drosophila PNPLA6 lead to photoreceptor cell 
death. We also report that lysophosphatidylcholine and lysophosphatidic acid 
levels are elevated in mutant Drosophila. These findings show a role for PNPLA6 
in photoreceptor survival and identify phospholipid metabolism as a potential 
therapeutic target for some forms of blindness.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms6614
PMCID: PMC4356490
PMID: 25574898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing financial interests: The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.

## Full Text

Abstract

Blindness due to retinal degeneration affects millions of people worldwide, but many disease-causing mutations remain unknown. PNPLA6 encodes the patatin-like phospholipase domain containing protein 6, also known as neuropathy target esterase (NTE), which is the target of toxic organophosphates that induce human paralysis due to severe axonopathy of large neurons. Mutations in PNPLA6 also cause human spastic paraplegia characterized by motor neuron degeneration. Here we identify PNPLA6 mutations in childhood blindness in seven families with retinal degeneration, including Leber congenital amaurosis and Oliver McFarlane syndrome. PNPLA6 localizes mostly at the inner segment plasma membrane in photo-receptors and mutations in Drosophila PNPLA6 lead to photoreceptor cell death. We also report that lysophosphatidylcholine and lysophosphatidic acid levels are elevated in mutant Drosophila . These findings show a role for PNPLA6 in photoreceptor survival and identify phospholipid metabolism as a potential therapeutic target for some forms of blindness.

Discussion

Our results suggest that PNPLA6 is essential for vision and photoreceptor biology, and that mutations in PNPLA6 cause photoreceptor neuron death and blindness in children with OMS and LCA. Moreover, this report documents the first gene for OMS and the 20th gene for LCA. Finding PNPLA6 mutations in various forms of childhood blindness was unexpected, because mutations and organophosphate-induced changes in PNPLA6 are observed in two neurological disorders with large motor neuron disease, spastic paraplegia (SPG39) and organophosphate-induced neuropathy (OPIDN). SPG39 and OPIDN are severe diseases but do not present with photoreceptor degeneration. Why do the mutations in PNPLA6 described here cause photoreceptor cell death, while patients with SPG39 and OPIDN do not? One explanation is that the PNPLA6 mutations in five out of seven of our families were compound heterozygotes, with one mutation in the regulatory and one mutation in the catalytic domain ( Fig. 2b and Supplementary Fig. 1 ). SPG39 patients have homozygous mutations in the catalytic (patatin) domain 12 , 16 . In OPIDN patients, the organophosphates bind to and inhibit only the catalytic domain and the N-terminal functions may not be affected. Having mutations in both domains may cause a more severe overall impairment of PNPLA6 function, leading to photoreceptor death. Alternatively, the mutations in the N-terminal regulatory domain might induce specific phenotypes. It is also possible that the harmful effects of organophosphates are not strong enough to affect retinal photoreceptors but only large neurons, such as motor neurons. It will be possible to test this hypothesis in future experiments.

PNPLA6 has been known for over 45 years and despite intense investigations (600 + publications), its various functions have not been fully elucidated 13 . Previously, PNPLA6 was found to be expressed in the brain, most prominently in large (motor) neurons, but not in the retinal tissue 2 , 17 . We now show ( Fig. 4 ) that PNPLA6 is expressed in the developing and mature mouse retina in horizontal, amacrine and photoreceptors cells, and in Drosophila photoreceptors. Unlike mouse neurons, where PNPLA6 localizes to the ER 12 , 18 , we show here that PNPLA6 is mostly localized to the IS plasma membrane of mouse photoreceptors, suggesting a possible role for PNPLA6 in the formation of distinct plasma membrane domains in the IS and in the OS, or in the development/renewal of OS disc membranes, which are essential for maintaining the integrity of the photoreceptors and vision 16 , 19 , 20 . Previous studies indeed support a role for PNPLA6 in membrane growth, as knockdowns of Pnpla6 in zebrafish caused axonal truncation and abnormal branching in addition to small eyes 17 . Furthermore, it was proposed that altered membrane trafficking in neuronal-specific Pnpla6 knockout mice causes axonal degeneration in spinal neurons 13 .

Similar to vertebrates, SWS is expressed in photoreceptor cells in flies. Although the photoreceptors develop normally in mutants, the eye-specific knockdown of SWS shows severe photoreceptor degeneration when aged, revealing that SWS is crucial for photoreceptor maintenance but not development. In addition, the degeneration is not dependent on light input, showing that the degeneration is not activity dependent. This suggests that the degeneration is caused by a failure to maintain the integrity of the photoreceptor cells and not by deleterious effects due to alterations in photoreception. This is also in agreement with the fact that the loss of SWS in other neurons also causes a progressive degeneration.

In agreement with the role of PNPLA6 as a phospholipase, we found alterations in phospholipid composition (LPC, LPA and PC) in Drosophila . We carefully examined the wild type, sws mutants and heterozygotes. Interestingly and importantly, we show a significant accumulation of all, LPA, LPC and LC, which may explain some of the clinical features of OMS. Indeed, elevated concentrations of LPA are known to be cytotoxic to neuronal cells, including photoreceptors 21 , and defects in the LPC acyltransferase-1, an enzyme catalysing the conversion of LPC to PC, cause photoreceptor degeneration in mice 22 . LPA also promotes hair growth 23 and defects either in LPA production 24 , 25 or LPA signalling 26 , 27 are associated with hair growth abnormalities, as observed in our OMS patients. It is therefore possible that elevations in LPA lead to the trichomegaly, wooly hair and progressive alopecia in our OMS patients. Altered LPA signalling may also be responsible for the abnormalities in bone and tooth development 28 , and growth hormone deficiency 25 , also seen in our OMS patients ( Table 1 ). Interestingly, transient juvenile trichomegaly and progressive alopecia, as well as a strong family history of different early-onset cancers 29 were also found in some of our families (data not shown). However, this link needs to be further explored.

Most of the identified mutations in OMS are in highly conserved residues, supporting their functional importance and potential use for rapid clinical testing of OMS and LCA patients. Our studies have opened a new avenue in investigating functions of PNPLA6 , including whether single PNPLA6 mutations increase photoreceptor susceptibility to environmental toxins. In the near future, it will be interesting to generate and characterize a photoreceptor-specific Pnpla6 mouse knockout to study the fundamental mechanism of action of PNPLA6 and evaluate the potential therapeutic benefits of lowering LPC and LPA.
