---
pmid: '17515607'
title: noxin, a novel stress-induced gene involved in cell cycle and apoptosis.
authors:
- Nakaya N
- Hemish J
- Krasnov P
- Kim SY
- Stasiv Y
- Michurina T
- Herman D
- Davidoff MS
- Middendorff R
- Enikolopov G
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1952090
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00551-06
---

# noxin, a novel stress-induced gene involved in cell cycle and apoptosis.
**Authors:** Nakaya N, Hemish J, Krasnov P, Kim SY, Stasiv Y, Michurina T, Herman D, Davidoff MS, Middendorff R, Enikolopov G
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00551-06](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00551-06)
**PMC:** [PMC1952090](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1952090/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Aug;27(15):5430-44. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00551-06. Epub 2007
May  21.

noxin, a novel stress-induced gene involved in cell cycle and apoptosis.

Nakaya N(1), Hemish J, Krasnov P, Kim SY, Stasiv Y, Michurina T, Herman D, 
Davidoff MS, Middendorff R, Enikolopov G.

Author information:
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, 
USA.

We describe a novel stress-induced gene, noxin, and a knockout mouse line with 
an inactivated noxin gene. The noxin gene does not have sequelogs in the genome 
and encodes a highly serine-rich protein with predicted phosphorylation sites 
for ATM, Akt, and DNA-dependent protein kinase kinases; nuclear localization 
signals; and a Zn finger domain. noxin mRNA and protein levels are under tight 
control by the cell cycle. noxin, identified as a nitric oxide-inducible gene, 
is strongly induced by a wide range of stress signals: gamma- and UV 
irradiation, hydrogen peroxide, adriamycin, and cytokines. This induction is 
dependent on p53. Noxin accumulates in the nucleus in response to stress and, 
when ectopically expressed, Noxin arrests the cell cycle at G1; although it also 
induces p53, the cell cycle arrest function of Noxin is independent of p53 
activity. noxin knockout mice are viable and fertile; however, they have an 
enlarged heart, several altered hematopoietic parameters, and a decreased number 
of spermatids. Importantly, loss or downregulation of Noxin leads to increased 
cell death. Our results suggest that Noxin may be a component of the cell 
defense system: it is activated by various stress stimuli, helps cells to 
withdraw from cycling, and opposes apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00551-06
PMCID: PMC1952090
PMID: 17515607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

We describe a novel stress-induced gene, noxin , and a knockout mouse line with an inactivated noxin gene. The noxin gene does not have sequelogs in the genome and encodes a highly serine-rich protein with predicted phosphorylation sites for ATM, Akt, and DNA-dependent protein kinase kinases; nuclear localization signals; and a Zn finger domain. noxin mRNA and protein levels are under tight control by the cell cycle. noxin , identified as a nitric oxide-inducible gene, is strongly induced by a wide range of stress signals: γ- and UV irradiation, hydrogen peroxide, adriamycin, and cytokines. This induction is dependent on p53. Noxin accumulates in the nucleus in response to stress and, when ectopically expressed, Noxin arrests the cell cycle at G 1 ; although it also induces p53, the cell cycle arrest function of Noxin is independent of p53 activity. noxin knockout mice are viable and fertile; however, they have an enlarged heart, several altered hematopoietic parameters, and a decreased number of spermatids. Importantly, loss or downregulation of Noxin leads to increased cell death. Our results suggest that Noxin may be a component of the cell defense system: it is activated by various stress stimuli, helps cells to withdraw from cycling, and opposes apoptosis.

DISCUSSION

Here, we describe noxin , a new stress-induced gene, and a mutant mouse line in which this gene is inactivated. noxin mRNA and protein expression is controlled by the cell cycle; it can also be activated by a wide range of stress stimuli. Noxin plays an anti-apoptotic role, so that when the noxin gene is inactivated or downregulated, cells exhibit significantly higher levels of apoptosis than their counterparts with normal levels of Noxin. This is evident under basal conditions and is maintained when cells are challenged by a range of dissimilar stress stimuli. Thus, our data suggest that noxin is a general stress response gene whose expression is related to the cell cycle and whose product may be important to prevent cell death under a wide range of conditions.

We had initially identified noxin as an NO-inducible gene, and indeed, it is activated by NO donors to a greater degree than any other tested gene related to cell cycle progression, cell death, or stress response (reference 13 and data not shown). Its induction by SNAP is prevented by the deletion of the p53 gene, indicating that p53 is important for the expression of noxin. noxin expression is induced both by chemical NO donors and by in vivo stimuli that induce NO production, e.g., cytokines; in the latter case, induction of noxin is dependent on the activity of NOS and can be prevented by NOS inhibitors (reference 13 and unpublished results).

In addition to NO and cytokines, noxin is induced by a wide range of stimuli: γ-irradiation, UV irradiation, adriamycin, and hydrogen peroxide. These agents activate different immediate targets but converge on a relatively small number of effectors, which can slow down or halt the cell cycle, suppress cell death pathways, and permit the repair process to proceed; alternatively, these effectors may activate the cell death program to eliminate defective cells. We propose that Noxin is a component of the basic cell machinery that is activated by various stressors, helps cells to withdraw from cycling, and prevents cell death.

The idea that Noxin acts as a part of the stress response system is strongly supported by our finding that a decrease or loss of Noxin leads to increased cell death. This was evident in three different types of assays (TUNEL, flow cytometry, and annexin V/PI staining) and in all tested settings, whether using cells from wild-type or noxin knockout animals or cells with RNA interference-induced downregulation of noxin expression (Fig. 9 and 10 ). The possible link to stress response is further supported by the presence, in the Noxin molecule, of phosphorylation sites for the ATM, DNA-PK, and Akt kinases, each of which plays a critical role in the stress response ( 12 , 16 , 23 , 26 ). This link is also supported by the fact that for each stress stimulus, induction of Noxin was dependent on p53 (Fig. 4D ). Furthermore, Noxin's participation in the stress response is compatible with the finding that it accumulates in the nucleus in response to stress. At the same time, since it takes several hours after the introduction of the stressor for the full induction of noxin , and since this induction is dependent on p53, it is conceivable that Noxin does not participate in the first line of defense against stress (e.g., compared with p53, whose rapid involvement in the repair process is achieved via posttranslational modification and increased stability of preexisting protein stores) ( 12 , 23 ).

The possible role of Noxin as a component of the cellular stress response system is further supported by its ability to induce cell cycle arrest (Fig. 6 ). Ectopic expression of Noxin is as, or more, effective than expression of the cell cycle inhibitors p21/WAF and p53 in inducing cell cycle arrest. It forces the cells to stall in G 1 /S, perhaps helping the cells to activate their repair systems. Noxin was effective in inducing cell cycle arrest even in the absence of p53 activity (in p53 −/− MEFs or when cotransfected with a dominant-negative p53 construct), indicating that it acts downstream or independently of p53. Note, however, that Noxin induction is dependent on p53 and that Noxin can, in turn, induce p53 levels. This suggests a model in which stress stimuli, in a p53-dependent manner, induce expression of Noxin, which then induces cell cycle arrest and elevates the levels of p53; the latter, however, is not required for the antiproliferative action of Noxin.

In addition to its ability to control cell cycle progression, Noxin is itself controlled by the cell cycle: the amount of noxin mRNA is very small in resting cells but increases almost 50-fold as the cells progress through S phase. In addition, its levels are decreased when cells are arrested by serum deprivation. Furthermore, noxin mRNA is mainly expressed in tissues that contain actively proliferating cell populations, such as bone marrow, spleen, and testis; also, it is expressed at much higher levels in actively dividing NIH 3T3 cells than in slowly dividing MEFs. The presence of Noxin may be required in dividing cells to help protect them from stress and damage.

Although we clearly saw the consequences of the loss of the noxin gene in cultured cells, we were able to see only small changes in knockout animals (e.g., heart size, the level of Sca1 + cells, and the number of round spermatids). So far, we have been unable to reveal the effect of deleting the gene on the animals' response to stress, e.g., to endotoxic shock; perhaps the loss of the noxin gene has a more subtle effect and other stress survival paradigms are required to reveal its contribution. Noxin also seems to be dispensable for the maintenance of the tissues and organs where it is expressed at high levels (testis, spleen, and bone marrow). It may require a focused challenge to these organs to reveal the role of Noxin as a stress response agent. Intriguingly, primary spermatocytes are more resistant to NO-induced apoptosis than other types of cells involved in spermatogenesis, e.g., spermatids ( 7 ). This is compatible with our observations that Noxin is selectively expressed in primary spermatocytes and that in the knockout animals, the number of TUNEL-positive cells in the seminiferous tubules is increased (data not shown) and is accompanied by a decrease in the number of spermatids. These observations suggest that Noxin may contribute to the protection of the germ line cells from nitrosative stress or other types of insults.

In conclusion, we cloned a novel gene that is controlled by the cell cycle; is activated in response to nitrosative, oxidative, and other types of stresses; is able to induce cell cycle arrest when ectopically expressed; and acts to counteract apoptotic stimuli, so that its loss results in an increased level of cell death. Our results suggest that Noxin may be a part of the machinery that protects cells during stress by helping them to withdraw from the cell cycle and repair the damage. Noxin may thus directly participate in the repair process and may even be a part of the protein complexes that restore the integrity of the genome after insult and stress.
