---
pmid: '20385771'
title: The Cdk1 and Ime2 protein kinases trigger exit from meiotic prophase in Saccharomyces
  cerevisiae by inhibiting the Sum1 transcriptional repressor.
authors:
- Shin ME
- Skokotas A
- Winter E
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2876671
doi: 10.1128/MCB.01682-09
---

# The Cdk1 and Ime2 protein kinases trigger exit from meiotic prophase in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by inhibiting the Sum1 transcriptional repressor.
**Authors:** Shin ME, Skokotas A, Winter E
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.01682-09](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.01682-09)
**PMC:** [PMC2876671](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2876671/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Jun;30(12):2996-3003. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01682-09. Epub 2010
 Apr 12.

The Cdk1 and Ime2 protein kinases trigger exit from meiotic prophase in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae by inhibiting the Sum1 transcriptional repressor.

Shin ME(1), Skokotas A, Winter E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson 
University, 233 South 10th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

The induction of middle meiotic promoters is a key regulatory event in the life 
cycle of Saccharomyces cerevisiae that controls exit from prophase, meiosis, and 
spore formation. The Sum1 repressor and Ndt80 activator proteins control middle 
promoters by binding to overlapping DNA elements. NDT80 is controlled by a 
tightly regulated middle meiotic promoter through a positive autoregulatory loop 
and is repressed in vegetative cells by Sum1. It has previously been shown that 
the meiosis-specific kinase Ime2 promotes the removal of Sum1 from DNA. Here, we 
show that Sum1 is also regulated by the cyclin-dependent kinase, Cdk1. While 
sum1 phosphosite mutants that are insensitive to Cdk1 or Ime2 complete meiosis 
and form spores, a mutant that is insensitive to both Ime2 and Cdk1 (sum1-ci) 
blocks meiotic development in prophase with an ndt80Delta-like phenotype. 
Ectopic expression of NDT80 or mutation of a Sum1-binding element in the NDT80 
promoter bypasses the sum1-ci block. Hst1 is a NAD(+)-dependent histone 
deacetylase that is linked to Sum1 by the Rfm1 tethering factor. Deletion of 
HST1 or RFM1 also bypasses the sum1-ci block. These results demonstrate that 
Sum1 functions as a key meiotic brake through the NDT80 promoter and that Cdk1 
and Ime2 trigger exit from meiotic prophase by inhibiting the Sum1 
transcriptional repression complex.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.01682-09
PMCID: PMC2876671
PMID: 20385771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The induction of middle meiotic promoters is a key regulatory event in the life cycle of Saccharomyces cerevisiae that controls exit from prophase, meiosis, and spore formation. The Sum1 repressor and Ndt80 activator proteins control middle promoters by binding to overlapping DNA elements. NDT80 is controlled by a tightly regulated middle meiotic promoter through a positive autoregulatory loop and is repressed in vegetative cells by Sum1. It has previously been shown that the meiosis-specific kinase Ime2 promotes the removal of Sum1 from DNA. Here, we show that Sum1 is also regulated by the cyclin-dependent kinase, Cdk1. While sum1 phosphosite mutants that are insensitive to Cdk1 or Ime2 complete meiosis and form spores, a mutant that is insensitive to both Ime2 and Cdk1 ( sum1-ci ) blocks meiotic development in prophase with an ndt80 Δ - like phenotype. Ectopic expression of NDT80 or mutation of a Sum1-binding element in the NDT80 promoter bypasses the sum1-ci block. Hst1 is a NAD + -dependent histone deacetylase that is linked to Sum1 by the Rfm1 tethering factor. Deletion of HST1 or RFM1 also bypasses the sum1-ci block. These results demonstrate that Sum1 functions as a key meiotic brake through the NDT80 promoter and that Cdk1 and Ime2 trigger exit from meiotic prophase by inhibiting the Sum1 transcriptional repression complex.

DISCUSSION

The conversion of middle-meiotic promoters from a repressed (Sum1-occupied) to an activated (Ndt80-occupied) state is a critical regulatory transition in the life cycle of S. cerevisiae that controls exit from prophase (at pachytene) and completion of the meiotic program. Sum1 and Ndt80 bind to overlapping segments of DNA, and it has been proposed that middle-promoter induction is triggered by competitive displacement ( 24 ). However, Sum1 can also be removed from DNA by a pathway that does not require Ndt80 ( 1 ). Ime2 promotes the removal of Sum1 from DNA in the NDT80 -independent pathway. In the present study, we have shown that Cdk1, similar to Ime2, inhibits Sum1 (Fig. 1 and 3 ) and that a form of Sum1 that is insensitive to both Cdk1 and Ime2 (Sum1-ci) blocks NDT80 expression (Fig. 2 ) and prophase exit (Fig. 4 ). The sum1-ci block can be bypassed by the ectopic expression of NDT80 , mutation of a Sum1-binding site in the NDT80 promoter, or deletion of HST1 or RFM1 (Fig. 5 , 6 , and 7 ). These findings indicate that the Sum1/Rfm1/Hst1 complex functions as a key regulatory brake at the NDT80 promoter and that the phosphorylation of Sum1 by either Cdk1 or Ime2 triggers removal of the brake, induction of NDT80 expression, and the completion of meiotic development. The ability of either Cdk1 or Ime2 to downregulate Sum1 may allow multiple inputs (e.g., dependency, checkpoint, and nutritional signals) to modulate the efficiency of prophase exit.
