---
pmid: '18079694'
title: A critical role of RICK/RIP2 polyubiquitination in Nod-induced NF-kappaB activation.
authors:
- Hasegawa M
- Fujimoto Y
- Lucas PC
- Nakano H
- Fukase K
- Núñez G
- Inohara N
journal: EMBO J
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2234345
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601962
---

# A critical role of RICK/RIP2 polyubiquitination in Nod-induced NF-kappaB activation.
**Authors:** Hasegawa M, Fujimoto Y, Lucas PC, Nakano H, Fukase K, Núñez G, Inohara N
**Journal:** EMBO J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601962](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601962)
**PMC:** [PMC2234345](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2234345/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2008 Jan 23;27(2):373-83. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601962. Epub 2007 Dec
 13.

A critical role of RICK/RIP2 polyubiquitination in Nod-induced NF-kappaB 
activation.

Hasegawa M(1), Fujimoto Y, Lucas PC, Nakano H, Fukase K, Núñez G, Inohara N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Nod1 and Nod2 are intracellular proteins that are involved in host recognition 
of specific bacterial molecules and are genetically associated with several 
inflammatory diseases. Nod1 and Nod2 stimulation activates NF-kappaB through 
RICK, a caspase-recruitment domain-containing kinase. However, the mechanism by 
which RICK activates NF-kappaB in response to Nod1 and Nod2 stimulation is 
unknown. Here we show that RICK is conjugated with lysine-63-linked 
polyubiquitin chains at lysine 209 (K209) located in its kinase domain upon Nod1 
or Nod2 stimulation and by induced oligomerization of RICK. Polyubiquitination 
of RICK at K209 was essential for RICK-mediated IKK activation and 
cytokine/chemokine secretion. However, RICK polyubiquitination did not require 
the kinase activity of RICK or alter the interaction of RICK with NEMO, a 
regulatory subunit of IkappaB kinase (IKK). Instead, polyubiquitination of RICK 
was found to mediate the recruitment of TAK1, a kinase that was found to be 
essential for Nod1-induced signaling. Thus, RICK polyubiquitination links TAK1 
to IKK complexes, a critical step in Nod1/Nod2-mediated NF-kappaB activation.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601962
PMCID: PMC2234345
PMID: 18079694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Nod1 and Nod2 are intracellular proteins that are involved in host recognition of specific bacterial molecules and are genetically associated with several inflammatory diseases. Nod1 and Nod2 stimulation activates NF-κB through RICK, a caspase-recruitment domain-containing kinase. However, the mechanism by which RICK activates NF-κB in response to Nod1 and Nod2 stimulation is unknown. Here we show that RICK is conjugated with lysine-63-linked polyubiquitin chains at lysine 209 (K209) located in its kinase domain upon Nod1 or Nod2 stimulation and by induced oligomerization of RICK. Polyubiquitination of RICK at K209 was essential for RICK-mediated IKK activation and cytokine/chemokine secretion. However, RICK polyubiquitination did not require the kinase activity of RICK or alter the interaction of RICK with NEMO, a regulatory subunit of IκB kinase (IKK). Instead, polyubiquitination of RICK was found to mediate the recruitment of TAK1, a kinase that was found to be essential for Nod1-induced signaling. Thus, RICK polyubiquitination links TAK1 to IKK complexes, a critical step in Nod1/Nod2-mediated NF-κB activation.

Introduction

Members of the nucleotide-binding domain-like receptor (NLR) protein family are found in both mammals and plants ( Inohara et al , 2005 ; Fritz et al , 2006 ). Several mammalian NLRs, like plant NLRs, are involved in host resistance against microbial pathogens and genetically associated with human immune diseases ( Inohara et al , 2005 ; Fritz et al , 2006 ). Two NLR family members, Nod1 and Nod2, play an essential role in the recognition of specific bacterial peptidoglycan (PGN)-related molecules ( Chamaillard et al , 2003 ; Inohara et al , 2003 ; Girardin et al , 2003a , 2003b ). Nod1 and Nod2 mediate transcriptional activation of innate immune genes including antimicrobial peptides, proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, that recruit immune cells to the sites of microbial stimulation ( Chamaillard et al , 2003 ; Kobayashi et al , 2005 ; Boughan et al , 2006 ; Marks et al , 2006 ; Masumoto et al , 2006 ; Voss et al , 2006 ). Although the precise structure of the bacterial molecules that stimulate NLR signaling remains largely unknown, the core recognition moieties of Nod1 and Nod2 have been identified as γ-glutamyl- meso -diaminopimelic acid (iE-DAP), and muramyl dipeptide (MDP), respectively ( Chamaillard et al , 2003 ; Girardin et al , 2003a , 2003b ; Inohara et al , 2003 ). Previous studies using synthetic and natural PGN-related molecules containing MDP and/or iE-DAP revealed that these molecules induce/enhance innate and adaptive immune responses ( Goto and Aoki, 1987 ; Fritz et al , 2007 ).

The induction of immune response genes through Nod1 and Nod2 signaling largely depends on NF-κB, a proinflammatory transcriptional factor ( Inohara et al , 1999 , 2000 ; Ogura et al , 2001 ; Masumoto et al , 2006 ). Transcriptional activation of proinflammatory genes is initiated by nuclear translocation of NF-κB following its release from the IκB proteins ( Karin and Ben-Neriah, 2000 ; Hoffmann and Baltimore, 2006 ). Previous studies demonstrated that RICK (RIP2/CARDIAK/RIPK2) is a critical downstream mediator of Nod1 and Nod2 signaling ( Inohara et al , 1999 ; Ogura et al , 2001 ; Chin et al , 2002 ; Kobayashi et al , 2002 ; Park et al , 2007 ). RICK is composed of N-terminal kinase and C-terminal caspase-recruitment domains (CARD) linked via an intermediate (IM) region ( Inohara et al , 1998 ; McCarthy et al , 1998 ; Thome et al , 1998 ). RICK physically associates with Nod1 and Nod2 through CARD–CARD interaction and activates IκB kinase (IKK), leading to phosphorylation and degradation of IκBs ( Inohara et al , 1999 , 2000 ; Ogura et al , 2001 ). Functional studies revealed that close proximity of RICK molecules by self-oligomerization of Nod1 and Nod2 is important for NF-κB activation ( Inohara et al , 2000 ). RICK is known to interact with NEMO (IKKγ/IKBKG) and this interaction is essential for NF-κB activation in RICK-mediated signaling ( Inohara et al , 2000 ). Furthermore, Nod2 stimulation with MDP induces NEMO polyubiquitination and this event is required for optimal NF-κB activation ( Abbott et al , 2004 ). However, the molecular mechanism by which the IKK complex is activated via RICK to induce NF-κB activation in response to NLR stimulation is unknown. Here we show that RICK is conjugated with K63-linked polyubiquitin chains upon Nod1 and Nod2 stimulation. RICK polyubiquitination was essential for NF-κB activation and chemokine/cytokine secretion in response to Nod1 stimulation. Furthermore, we provide evidence for a bridging function of RICK ubiquitination by linking TAK1 to the IKK complex that is critical for NF-κB activation during Nod signaling.

Discussion

RICK is an essential and specific mediator of Nod1 and Nod2 signaling ( Chin et al , 2002 ; Kobayashi et al , 2002 ; Park et al , 2007 ). However, the mechanism by which RICK mediates Nod1- and Nod2-mediated immune responses has remained poorly defined. Here we found an essential role for RICK polyubiquitination in Nod1- and Nod2-mediated NF-κB activation. The K63-linked polyubiquitin chain at K209 in RICK was found to be important for the recruitment of the TAK1 complex to RICK and IKKs. Similarly, RIP (RIPK1), a RICK homologue, was shown to play a critical role in TNFα-induced NF-κB activation through its polyubiquitination at K377 located in the IM region between the N-terminal kinase and C-terminal death domains ( Ea et al , 2006 ; Li et al , 2006 ). Like that of RICK, polyubiquitinations of RIP are both critical for recruitment of TAK1 complex. Therefore, our results indicate that Nod1/Nod2 and TNFα signaling is mediated through similar molecular events.

Previous studies suggested an important role for the IM domain located between the kinase domain and the CARD of RICK in Nod1-mediated NF-κB activation ( Inohara et al , 2000 ). Here we further characterized the structural requirement of IM and found that the region between 293 and 319, near to the N-terminal kinase domain, is important for NF-κB activation. This is also comparable to the observation that the IM region of RIP is required for TNF signaling ( Inohara et al , 2000 ). However, oligomerization of RICK-Fpk3 fusion protein carrying the IM region alone did not result in NF-κB activation ( Figure 3C ), whereas that of the equivalent region of RIP was sufficient to induce oligomerization-dependent NF-κB activation ( Inohara et al , 2000 ). These results suggest that the kinase domain of RICK, but not that of RIP, is essential for NF-κB activation. Previous studies showed that the K47M kinase-inactive mutant of RICK still activates NF-κB ( Inohara et al , 2000 ), suggesting that the kinase domain of RICK mediates a critical function, other than phosphorylation, which is required for the induction of NF-κB. Indeed, we found here that K63-linked polyubiquitination at K209 within the kinase domain of RICK is essential for RICK-mediated signaling. In contrast, the critical polyubiquitination site of RIP at K377 is located the IM region ( Ea et al , 2006 ; Li et al , 2006 ). These results indicate that RICK and RIP differ in the domain localization of the critical K63-linked polyubiquitination site, providing a mechanistic explanation for the observed differences between the two related kinases in the induction of NF-κB. Although the localization of the K63-linked polyubiquitinated site is different in RICK and RIP, polyubiquitination of both kinases is regulated by upstream stimuli and required for recruitment of the critical TAK1 complex to these kinases. While polyubiquitination of RICK is essential for Nod1-mediated NF-κB activation, the E3s that mediate polyubiquitination of RICK remain unknown. Some possible candidates include the TRAFs, which are known to associate with RICK ( McCarthy et al , 1998 ; Thome et al , 1998 ). Here we demonstrated that TRAF2 −/− TRAF5 −/− MEFs lack NF-κB activation upon Nod1 stimulation. However, we do not have convincing evidence that TRAF2 and TRAF5 directly ubiquitinate RICK. We could not find consensus sequences of TRAF2- and TRAF5-binding sites in regions near K209 in RICK. Although we still do not know how the E3(s) specifically recognize RICK as a substrate, K209 is highly conserved in RICK but not in other kinases and is located in the putative flexible loop region ( Supplementary Figure 1 ). Further studies are required to determine the mechanism by which TRAFs are involved in Nod/RICK-mediated signaling, and conclusively identify the E3(s), which ubiquitinates K209 in RICK.

In summary, we have dissected two molecular signaling events that are critical for Nod signaling, namely recruitment of TAK1 to polyubiquitinated K209 located in the kinase domain, and recruitment of NEMO, which is mediated by the IM region of RICK. NEMO interacted with RICK-ΔCARD-Fpk3 in the absence of AP1510, which is required for polyubiquitination of K209 and concomitant NF-κB activation ( Figure 3D ). As a result, the interaction between RICK and NEMO through the IM region appears to be independent of the interaction between TAK1 and RICK and is not sufficient to activate NF-κB. Therefore, the association of RICK with both TAK1 and IKK complexes are required for signal transduction resulting in NF-κB activation. This conclusion leads us to propose the following model ( Figure 9 ): the molecular events during Nod1 and Nod2 signaling are (1) the recruitment of RICK to Nod1 and Nod2 upon sensing of their specific microbial stimuli, (2) the close proximity of RICK induced by the self-oligomerization of Nod1 and Nod2, (3) polyubiquitination at K209 in RICK by unknown E3(s), (4) recruitment of the TAK1 complex to RICK, (5) further recruitment of IKK complex through the interaction between the IM region of RICK with NEMO, and finally (6) activation of IKKs by TAK1. In this model, Nod1 and Nod2 play an important role as switches to turn on the downstream cascade reaction and RICK functions as a bridging protein to link TAK1 and IKK complexes. Similarly, RIP may function as a bridging protein between TAK1 and IKK complexes in TNFα signaling. However, the K63-linked polyubiquitination site K377 is located in the IM region and, therefore, previous studies could not separate the two molecular events mediated by RIP, namely the recruitment of TAK1 and that of the IKKs. Further studies are required to explore the differences and similarities between Nod and TNF signaling pathways.

The kinase domain of RICK possesses protein kinase activity ( Inohara et al , 1998 ; McCarthy et al , 1998 ; Thome et al , 1998 ) and residues critical for catalytic activity are evolutionary conserved. However, previous and current studies showed that the residue critical for kinase activity is not essential for NF-κB activation, polyubiquitination of RICK and interaction of RICK with NEMO ( Inohara et al , 2000 ). Therefore, the kinase activity of RICK might regulate other molecules including ERKs, p38 kinases and caspase-1 that have been linked to RICK-mediated signaling ( Thome et al , 1998 ; Navas et al , 1999 ; Chin et al , 2002 ; Kobayashi et al , 2002 ). Previous studies suggested that the activation of these intracellular molecules is important for secretion of certain cytokines upon Nod1 and Nod2 stimulation ( Inohara et al , 2001 ; Girardin et al , 2003a , 2003b ; Viala et al , 2004 ). Alternatively, the kinase domain of RICK may regulate the turnover rate of the RICK protein. Consistent with the latter, we found lower but significant residual polyubiquitination of RICK independent from K63-Ub upon Nod1 and Nod2 stimulation ( Figure 2 ), suggesting that RICK is partially polyubiquitinated in a K63-Ub-independent manner. Furthermore, K48-linked polyubiquitination of RIP during TNFα signaling has been suggested to regulate proteasomal degradation of RIP ( Wertz et al , 2004 ). Therefore, our finding suggests that K48-linked polyubiquitination of RICK might regulate RICK protein levels during Nod signaling. The functional relevance of K63-Ub-independent polyubiquitination of RICK and the role of the kinase activity in RICK protein degradation warrant further investigation.
