---
pmid: '10581360'
title: Differential function of the two nucleotide binding domains on cystic fibrosis
  transmembrane conductance regulator.
authors:
- Nagel G
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '1999'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC6773187
doi: 10.1016/s0005-2736(99)00162-5
---

# Differential function of the two nucleotide binding domains on cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator.
**Authors:** Nagel G
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0005-2736(99)00162-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0005-2736(99)00162-5)
**PMC:** [PMC6773187](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6773187/)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Dec 6;1461(2):263-74. doi: 
10.1016/s0005-2736(99)00162-5.

Differential function of the two nucleotide binding domains on cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator.

Nagel G(1).

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Biophysik, Kennedyallee 70, 60596, Frankfurt/M., 
Germany.

The genetic disease cystic fibrosis is caused by defects in the chloride channel 
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). CFTR belongs to the 
family of ABC transporters. In contrast to most other members of this family 
which transport substrates actively across a membrane, the main function of CFTR 
is to regulate passive flux of substrates across the plasma membrane. Chloride 
channel activity of CFTR is dependent on protein phosphorylation and presence of 
nucleoside triphosphates. From electrophysiological studies of CFTR detailed 
models of its regulation by phosphorylation and nucleotide interaction have 
evolved. These investigations provide ample evidence that ATP hydrolysis is 
crucial for CFTR gating. It becomes apparent that the two nucleotide binding 
domains on CFTR not only diverge strongly in sequence, but also in function. 
Based on previous models and taking into account new data from pre-steady-state 
experiments, a refined model for the action of nucleotides at two nucleotide 
binding domains was recently proposed.

DOI: 10.1016/s0005-2736(99)00162-5
PMID: 10581360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Capsaicin (CAP)-activated ion channel plays a key role in generating nociceptive neural signals in sensory neurons. Here we present evidence that intracellular ATP upregulates the activity of capsaicin receptor channel. In inside-out membrane patches isolated from sensory neurons, application of CAP activated a nonselective cation channel ( i cap ). Further addition of ATP to the bath caused a significant increase in i cap , with a K 1/2 of 3.3 m m . Nonhydrolyzable analogs of ATP, adenylimidodiphosphate and adenosine 5′- O -(3-thio)-triphosphate, also increased i cap . Neither Mg 2+ -free medium nor inhibitors of various kinases blocked the increase in i cap induced by ATP. The enhancing effect of ATP was also observed in inside-out patches of oocytes expressing vanilloid receptor 1, a cloned capsaicin receptor. Single point mutations (D178N, K735R) within the putative Walker type nucleotide-binding domains abolished the effect of ATP. These results show that ATP increases i cap in sensory neurons by direct interaction with the CAP channel without involvement of phosphorylation.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Cell culture. Primary cultures of dorsal root ganglion neurons isolated from 1- or 2-d-old neonatal rats were used for recording single-channel currents as described previously ( Hamill et al., 1981 ; Oh et al., 1996 ; Jung et al., 1999 ). Briefly, dorsal root ganglia from all levels of thoracic and lumbar spinal cord of neonatal rats were collected in a cold washing solution (mixture of DMEM and F-12; Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY). Ganglia were then incubated for 30 min in culture medium containing 1 mg/ml collagenase (Worthington, Freehold, NJ) at 37°C. The culture medium was a mixture of DMEM and F-12 solution containing 10% fetal calf serum (Life Technologies), 1 m m sodium pyruvate, 50–100 ng/ml nerve growth factor (Boehringer Mannheim, Indianapolis, IN), and 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin (Life Technologies). Ganglia were then washed three times with Mg 2+ - and Ca 2+ -free HBSS (Life Technologies) and then incubated in HBSS containing 2.5 mg/ml trypsin (Life Technologies) at 37°C for 30 min followed by a 10 min centrifugation at 1000 rpm. The pellet was washed gently in culture medium and resuspended in the culture medium by gentle trituration. Suspended cells were plated on round glass coverslips pretreated with poly- l -lysine (0.5 mg/ml). Cells were incubated at 37°C in 95% air and 5% CO 2 mixture and used 2–4 d after plating.

Site-directed mutagenesis and expression of VR1 in oocytes. Mutations within the putative Walker A and B motifs found in the amino acid sequence of VR1 were introduced into pSDTF-VR1 (courtesy of T. P. Snutch of University of British Columbia) using recombinant PCR ( Higuchi, 1990 ). Oligonucleotide primers for VR1-D178N (5′-CTGCT- CCTG A ACGTTGCCCGGAAGACA-3′) or VR1-K735R (5′-CCTGAC- GGCA G GGATGACTACCGGTGG-3′) mutants were designed to make single-base changes (italic). Mutations were produced in two steps. Briefly, two separate amplification reactions, one using sense primer Hin dIII (5′-CCCAAGCTTGCCGCCACCATGGAACAACGGGCTAGC-3′) and mutant antisense primer and the other using mutant sense primer and Kpn I antisense primer (5′-CCGGTACCTTATTTCTCCCCTGGGAC-3′), were performed simultaneously for each mutant construct. The two reaction products were separated on a 1% agarose gel. DNA bands were excised and used as template for a second PCR amplification using Hin dIII and Kpn I primers. For mutation in both Walker A and B motifs, VR1-K735R and VR1-D178N DNAs were digested with Sac II and Xba I, respectively, and the 1.3 kb fragment of K735R and the 4.4 kb fragment of D178N were ligated. Mutations were verified by sequencing around the sites of the mutation. DNA was linearized downstream of VR1 cDNA at the Xba I site. cRNA was generated with SP6 promoter using Megascript in vitro transcription kit (Ambion, Austin, TX). The concentration of cRNA was measured from the absorbance at 260 nm and stored at −70°C in RNase-free water.

Xenopus oocytes were surgically removed and defolliculated by treating oocytes with collagenase (type IA; Sigma, St. Louis, MO; 2 mg/ml) for 1–1.5 hr at room temperature in a solution containing (in m m ): 82 NaCl, 20 MgCl 2 , 5 HEPES, and 2 KCl, pH 7.5. Each oocyte was injected with ∼50 nl of cRNA (∼25 ng of cRNA) encoding wild-type or mutant VR1. Three to five days after the injection, vitelline membrane of oocytes was removed by incubating the oocytes with protease (type XXVII; Sigma; 0.5 mg/ml) for 10 min. The action of protease was terminated after washing in a solution containing a trypsin inhibitor (1 mg/ml; type II-S; soybean; Sigma). The stripped oocytes were then placed in a recording chamber for single-channel recording.

Electrophysiology. Gigaseals were formed with borosilicate glass capillaries (Narishige, Tokyo, Japan) coated with Sylgard (Dow Corning, Midland, MI). Tip resistances of the glass pipettes used were ∼5 MΩ. For single-channel recording, inside-out patches isolated from cultured sensory neurons or oocytes were formed as described previously ( Hamill et al., 1981 ). Single-channel currents were recorded with a patch-clamp amplifier (Axopatch 1D; Axon Instruments, Foster City, CA), filtered at 2.5 kHz with an eight pole, low-pass Bessel filter (Frequency Device, Haverhill, MA), digitized at 37 kHz with a digital data recorder (Instrutech, Great Neck, NY), and stored on videotapes. Digitized data were imported to a computer to obtain mean open times, amplitude histograms, and open probability ( Po ). The half-amplitude algorithm in Fetchan (pClamp; Axon Instruments) was used to detect open events. Using pClamp software, Po was calculated as the value equal to the area under the curve representing open events divided by the sum of the areas under the curves representing open and closing events. Channel activity was calculated as NPo , where N is the number of observed channels in the patch. NPo of single-channel currents was determined only from membrane patches that contained less than six CAP-activated channels.

Solutions and chemicals. For recording single-channel currents in cultured DRG neurons or oocytes, control bath and pipette solutions contained (in m m ): 140 NaCl, 2 MgCl 2 , 5 EGTA, and 10 HEPES, pH 7.2. Mg 2+ -free solution contained (in m m ): 140 NaCl, 5 EDTA, and 10 HEPES, pH 7.2. The bath solution having K + as the charge carrier contained (in m m ): 140 KCl, 2 MgCl 2 , 5 EGTA, and 10 HEPES, pH 7.2. CAP was dissolved and stored as 10 m m stock solution in 100% ethanol. ATP, adenylimidodiphosphate, adenosine 5′- O -(3-thio)-triphosphate, 2-deoxy ATP, and other nucleotide triphosphates were dissolved in water, pH 7.0, stored as 100 m m or 10 m m stock solutions, and kept at −70°C. H-7 or other kinase inhibitors (Research Biochemicals, Natick, MA) were stored at 10 m m as stock solutions. A Ca 2+ -calmodulin dependent kinase II (CaMKII) inhibitor, CaMKII 281–301 (Research Biochemicals), was prepared in the control bath solution immediately before use. All electrophysiological experiments were performed at room temperature.

All values are expressed as mean ± SEM. ANOVA followed by a Tukey post hoc test was used for analysis of multiple comparisons among means. p < 0.05 was considered significant.

DISCUSSION

CAP-activated channels that exist in a group of small sensory neurons are believed to be involved in the generation of multiple forms of nociceptive neural signals and are now considered as molecular pain transducers for various noxious stimuli ( Kress and Zeilhofer, 1999 ; Szallasi and Blumberg, 1999 ; Caterina et al., 2000 ; Davis et al., 2000 ). Thus, study of the mechanisms by which the CAP receptor is modulated by various factors will greatly aid in understanding the cellular processes underlying nociception. In the present study, we show that the CAP receptor is modulated by intracellular ATP in isolated membrane patches of cultured sensory neurons. We have provided evidence that ATP interacts with the putative nucleotide-binding domains of the CAP receptor to enhance the channel activity. Our results are consistent with the view that ATP augments CAP-activated channel activity by an allosteric mechanism.
