---
pmid: '11751867'
title: The LIM domain protein LMO4 interacts with the cofactor CtIP and the tumor
  suppressor BRCA1 and inhibits BRCA1 activity.
authors:
- Sum EY
- Peng B
- Yu X
- Chen J
- Byrne J
- Lindeman GJ
- Visvader JE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110603200
---

# The LIM domain protein LMO4 interacts with the cofactor CtIP and the tumor suppressor BRCA1 and inhibits BRCA1 activity.
**Authors:** Sum EY, Peng B, Yu X, Chen J, Byrne J, Lindeman GJ, Visvader JE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110603200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110603200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 8;277(10):7849-56. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110603200. Epub
2001  Dec 18.

The LIM domain protein LMO4 interacts with the cofactor CtIP and the tumor 
suppressor BRCA1 and inhibits BRCA1 activity.

Sum EY(1), Peng B, Yu X, Chen J, Byrne J, Lindeman GJ, Visvader JE.

Author information:
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research and Bone Marrow Research 
Laboratories, Melbourne, Victoria 3050, Australia.

LMO4 belongs to the LIM-only (LMO) group of transcriptional regulators that 
appear to function as molecular adaptors for protein-protein interactions. 
Expression of the LMO4 gene is developmentally regulated in the mammary gland 
and is up-regulated in primary breast cancers. Using LMO4 in a yeast two-hybrid 
screen, we have identified the cofactor CtIP as an LMO4-binding protein. 
Interaction with CtIP appeared to be specific for the LMO subclass of LIM domain 
proteins and could be mediated by a single LIM motif of LMO4. We further 
identified the breast tumor suppressor BRCA1 as an LMO4-associated protein. The 
C-terminal BRCT domains of BRCA1, previously shown to bind CtIP, also mediated 
interaction with LMO4. Tumor-associated mutations within the BRCT repeats that 
abolish interaction between BRCA1 and CtIP had no effect on the association of 
BRCA1 with LMO4. A stable complex comprising LMO4, BRCA1, and CtIP was 
demonstrated in vivo. The LIM domain binding-protein Ldb1 also participated in 
this multiprotein complex. In functional assays, LMO4 was shown to repress 
BRCA1-mediated transcriptional activation in both yeast and mammalian cells. 
These findings reveal a novel complex between BRCA1, LMO4, and CtIP and indicate 
a role for LMO4 as a repressor of BRCA1 activity in breast tissue.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110603200
PMID: 11751867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
