---
pmid: '10551859'
title: Expression of BRC repeats in breast cancer cells disrupts the BRCA2-Rad51 complex
  and leads to radiation hypersensitivity and loss of G(2)/M checkpoint control.
authors:
- Chen CF
- Chen PL
- Zhong Q
- Sharp ZD
- Lee WH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.46.32931
---

# Expression of BRC repeats in breast cancer cells disrupts the BRCA2-Rad51 complex and leads to radiation hypersensitivity and loss of G(2)/M checkpoint control.
**Authors:** Chen CF, Chen PL, Zhong Q, Sharp ZD, Lee WH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.46.32931](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.46.32931)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 12;274(46):32931-5. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.46.32931.

Expression of BRC repeats in breast cancer cells disrupts the BRCA2-Rad51 
complex and leads to radiation hypersensitivity and loss of G(2)/M checkpoint 
control.

Chen CF(1), Chen PL, Zhong Q, Sharp ZD, Lee WH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Biotechnology, University of 
Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas 78245, USA.

BRCA2 is a breast tumor suppressor with a potential function in the cellular 
response to DNA damage. BRCA2 binds to Rad51 through its BRC repeats. In support 
of the biological significance of this interaction, we found that the complex of 
BRCA2 and Rad51 in breast cancer MCF-7 cells was diminished upon conditional 
expression of a wild-type, but not a mutated, BRC4 repeat using the 
tetracycline-inducible system. Cells expressing a wild-type BRC4 repeat showed 
hypersensitivity to gamma-irradiation, an inability to form Rad51 
radiation-induced foci, and a failure of radiation-induced G(2)/M, but not 
G(1)/S, checkpoint control. These results strongly suggest that the interaction 
between BRCA2 and Rad51 mediated by BRC repeats is critical for the cellular 
response to DNA damage.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.46.32931
PMID: 10551859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
