---
pmid: '19211897'
title: Endodomain diversity in the Drosophila Dscam and its roles in neuronal morphogenesis.
authors:
- Yu HH
- Yang JS
- Wang J
- Huang Y
- Lee T
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC2671081
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5743-08.2009
---

# Endodomain diversity in the Drosophila Dscam and its roles in neuronal morphogenesis.
**Authors:** Yu HH, Yang JS, Wang J, Huang Y, Lee T
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5743-08.2009](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5743-08.2009)
**PMC:** [PMC2671081](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2671081/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2009 Feb 11;29(6):1904-14. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5743-08.2009.

Endodomain diversity in the Drosophila Dscam and its roles in neuronal 
morphogenesis.

Yu HH(1), Yang JS, Wang J, Huang Y, Lee T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Drosophila Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule (Dscam) can be variably spliced 
to encode 152,064 distinct single-pass transmembrane proteins. In addition to 
19,008 possible ectodomains and two alternative transmembrane segments, it may 
carry endodomains containing or lacking exons 19 and 23. Here, we determine the 
role of Dscam endodomain diversity in neural development. Dscam with full-length 
endodomain is largely restricted to embryogenesis. In contrast, most Dscams lack 
exons 19 and 23 at postembryonic stages. As implicated from the expression 
patterns, removal of Dscam exon 19-containing variants disrupts wiring of 
embryonic neurons while silencing of Dscam transcripts lacking exon 19 or exon 
23 effectively blocks postembryonic neuronal morphogenesis. Furthermore, 
compared with exon 19-containing Dscam, transgenic Dscam without exon 19 is more 
efficiently targeted to neurites and more potently suppresses axon bifurcation 
in Dscam mutant neurons. In sum, Dscam with or without exon 19 in its endodomain 
is used to govern different stage-specific neuronal morphogenetic processes, 
possibly due to differences in protein targeting.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5743-08.2009
PMCID: PMC2671081
PMID: 19211897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Drosophila Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule ( Dscam ) can be variably spliced to encode 152,064 distinct single-pass transmembrane proteins. In addition to 19,008 possible ectodomains and two alternative transmembrane segments, it may carry endodomains containing or lacking exons 19 and 23. Here, we determine the role of Dscam endodomain diversity in neural development. Dscam with full-length endodomain is largely restricted to embryogenesis. In contrast, most Dscams lack exons 19 and 23 at postembryonic stages. As implicated from the expression patterns, removal of Dscam exon 19-containing variants disrupts wiring of embryonic neurons while silencing of Dscam transcripts lacking exon 19 or exon 23 effectively blocks postembryonic neuronal morphogenesis. Furthermore, compared with exon 19-containing Dscam, transgenic Dscam without exon 19 is more efficiently targeted to neurites and more potently suppresses axon bifurcation in Dscam mutant neurons. In sum, Dscam with or without exon 19 in its endodomain is used to govern different stage-specific neuronal morphogenetic processes, possibly due to differences in protein targeting.

Introduction

One major challenge in the assembly of functional neural circuits is to distinguish self-branches from those of their neighboring neurons to prevent redundant connections. In Drosophila , Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule (Dscam) is primarily involved in this process during neuronal morphogenesis, including axonal guidance, axonal targeting and proper arborization of axons and dendrites ( Wang et al., 2002 ; Chen et al., 2006 ; Zhu et al., 2006 ). Drosophila Dscam can encode 152,064 distinct Ig/fibronectin-type-III cell adhesion molecules through alternative choices of 19,008 ectodomains, two transmembrane domains and 4 endodomains ( Schmucker et al., 2000 ; Wang et al., 2004 ). The huge diversity in the ectodomain, which only binds to the same-kind ectodomain with high affinity, potentially underlies self-recognition for individual neurons ( Wojtowicz et al., 2004 ). Repulsion as a consequence of the homophilic Dscam–Dscam interactions may mediate self-avoidance among the neurites derived from the same cell while permitting fasciculation of neurites of different origins, to ensure proper patterning of multiple growth cones migrating simultaneously ( Matthews et al., 2007 ). Furthermore, elaboration of dendrites versus axons in the same neuron may involve different subsets of Dscam ectodomains, since a Dscam ectodomain can be selectively targeted to dendrites or axons depending on its transmembrane domain ( Shi et al., 2007 ).

Compared with the well studied Dscam ectodomain and transmembrane domain, little is known about the role of Dscam endodomain in neuronal morphogenesis. Here, we knocked down specific Dscam endodomain isoforms to determine their roles in neuronal morphogenesis. A microRNA (miRNA)-based inducible RNA interference (RNAi) silences specific transcripts based on discrete 22-nucleotide sequences ( Chen et al., 2007 ; Shi et al., 2007 ). This approach allows us to directly demonstrate the involvement of distinct isoforms at different places and times. It knocks down isoform expression after splicing, rather than at the transcriptional level through genomic manipulation, and should minimally affect the normal usage of isoforms. Using this technique, we are able to silence specific Dscam endodomain isoforms by targeting the exon 19- or exon 23-characteristic sequences, or the unique sequences around the junction between exon 18 and exon 20 or between exon 22 and exon 24.

Elimination of Dscam isoforms either containing or lacking exons 19 and 23 revealed that the wiring of adult fly neural circuitry primarily involves Dscam isoforms lacking exon 19 and exon 23. However, Dscam with exon 19 plays a more important role than Dscam without exon 19 in supporting wiring of embryonic neural circuitry. In addition, Dscam variants with or without exon 23 are expressed in different compartments of the developing nervous system. Furthermore, transgenic Dscam without exon 19 is more efficiently targeted to neurites and more potently suppresses axon bifurcation in Dscam mutant neurons than exon 19-containing Dscam. This study demonstrates that Dscam governs diverse neural developmental processes not only through its variations in the extracellular and transmembrane domains, but also via the involvement of four different intracellular domains. Dscams with distinct endodomains mediate neural development at different stages and possibly in distinct contexts.

Discussion

In this study, we demonstrate that Dscam endodomain variants are dynamically and differentially expressed in the developing Drosophila CNS. This conclusion derives from: (1) the analysis of Dscam transcript compositions by RT-PCR, (2) the localization of specific Dscam endodomains by depleting the alternatives via RNAi against exon 19, exon 23, or the unique exon-exon junctions derived from skipping of exon 19 or exon 23 ( Fig. 2 ), and (3) the direct visualization of Dscam+19 using Ab19 as opposed to labeling all the Dscam isoforms with Ab18 ( Fig. 3 ). Postembryonic neuronal morphogenesis uses Dscam variants lacking exons 19 and 23 ( Fig. 4 C ), while Dscam+19 plays a more important role in the wiring of embryonic neural tracts ( Fig. 4 F ). Skipping exon 19 prevents accumulation of Dscams in neuronal cell bodies, implicating a mechanism for regulating Dscam protein targeting by the alternative splicing of exon 19 ( Figs. 6 , 7 ). In addition, exon 23 is dispensable for most Dscam-dependent neuronal morphogenetic processes but present in probably all the Dscam molecules in certain neural structures, suggesting an unidentified Dscam function in the developing Drosophila CNS ( Fig. 2 F ).

Four different Dscam endodomain variants arise from independent alternative splicing by skipping exon 19 or exon 23. Possible approaches to study the role of these Dscam endodomain variants in neuronal morphogenesis include: (1) manipulating Dscam at the genomic level by gene targeting ( Gong and Golic, 2003 ), or (2) silencing different Dscam endodomain transcripts by RNAi ( Chen et al., 2007 ; Shi et al., 2007 ). Deleting genomic sequence to manipulate alternative exon choice might be problematic, since elimination of specific Dscam endodomain variants inevitably leads to expression of other isoforms in much broader patterns and/or at higher levels than the normal unperturbed conditions. In contrast, knock-down of Dscam endodomain variants at the translational level by RNAi should deplete the isoforms of interest while minimally affecting the expression of others. Furthermore, by targeting the junction spanning different exons ( Fig. 1 ), the miRNA-based silencing approach allowed us to selectively deplete isoforms that lack any unique exon shared by the isoform subset. It is also worth noting that transgenic miRNA could eliminate endogenous Dscam expression at the embryonic stage, while double-strand RNA transgenes perform poorly at this stage ( Fig. 2 E ) (H.-H. Yu and T. Lee, unpublished observations).

Using miRNA-based knockdown and immunostaining by isoform-specific antibodies, we discovered that Dscam+19 and Dscam−19 redundantly govern neuronal morphogenesis but are preferentially used at different developmental stages ( Figs. 2 , 3 ). Dscam+19 is primarily used during embryogenesis, whereas Dscam−19 abundantly exists in the postembryonic nervous system ( Fig. 3 D , F ). Despite the dynamic changes in the relative abundance, Dscam+19 and Dscam−19 exhibit similar spatial expression patterns ( Fig. 2 B , C , J , K ). Consistent with these expression profiles, endogenous Dscam−19 plays an essential role in postembryonic neuronal morphogenesis ( Figs. 2 J , 4 C ), while Dscam+19 plays a role in the formation of embryonic CNS ( Figs. 3 D , 4 F ).

In contrast to the dynamic usage of exon 19, Dscam+23 and Dscam−23 are enriched in different neural structures at the same developmental stages ( Fig. 2 F , G , N , O ). It appears that the high-expression domains exclusively consist of Dscam−23 and depleting Dscam − 23 transcripts is sufficient to recapitulate the loss-of- Dscam phenotype ( Fig. 3 C ). Notably, Dscam+23 is selectively expressed in some midline cells of the embryonic CNS ( Fig. 2 F ). Further investigation is needed to determine the identity of these midline cells (e.g., unpaired midline neurons or glia).

Skipping exon 19 produces the Dscam without a proline-rich motif and an ITAM-like ( Fig. 1 A ). An ITAM is defined by a motif containing two tyrosine residues within the consensus sequence of YxxI/Lx (6–12) YxxI/L ( Fodor et al., 2006 ). Unlike most ITAM motifs which carry Ile/Leu adjacent to the second tyrosine residue, AL is present in that position of Dscam ( Fig. 1 A ). The utilization of YxxA in ITAM is not unprecedented since the same variation occurs in RhoH, a hematopoietic-specific GTPase-deficient member of Rho GTPase family ( Gu et al., 2006 ). ITAM-mediated signals control a variety of cellular responses, ranging from phagocytosis, cell migration, proliferation, differentiation to gene induction ( Fodor et al., 2006 ). Whether the ITAM-like in Dscam can mediate the canonical ITAM signal transduction to govern similar cellular responses awaits investigation. Intriguingly, transgenic Dscams are enriched in different subcellular compartments depending on the presence or absence of exon 19 ( Fig. 6 ). In the MBs, transgenic Dscam−19 is preferentially targeted to neurites while transgenic Dscam+19 is distributed throughout the neurons. Induction of transgenic Dscams with different endodomains in AL PNs revealed similar patterns of differential protein distribution ( Fig. 7 C , F ). These correlate with the phenomena that transgenic Dscam−19 acted more potently than Dscam+19 in altering neurite projection patterns in both MB neurons and PNs ( Fig. 5 ) (Yu and Lee, unpublished observations). It remains to be determined whether the proline-rich motif and/or the ITAM-like within exon 19 help regulate protein distribution of Dscam.

The notable difference between Dscam+23 and Dcam−23 is the latter variant lacking exon 23 and thus losing a PDZ-binding motif ( Fig. 1 A ). However, transgenic Dscams behaved indiscriminately in the presence or absence of exon 23, yielding no insight into why Dscam−23 is used in known Dscam-dependent neuronal morphogenetic processes ( Fig. 5 B ). In addition, Dscam + 19 + 23::GFP transgene that abolishes the potential PDZ-binding motif located at the C terminus of Dscam remains as potent as unmodified Dscam in preventing sister branches from extending into the same axon bundle in single-cell clones of Dscam mutant neurons ( Soba et al., 2007 ). To unravel the function of the PDZ-binding motif in Dscam+23 may require more sensitive assays or studies in different model systems.

Transgenic Dscam−19 not only effectively prevents multiple self-branches from extending into the same MB lobe in Dscam mutant single-cell MARCM clones, but it also blocks axon bifurcation which results in single-branch/neuron phenotype in a significant number of the rescued single-cell MARCM clones ( Fig. 5 ). The single-branch/neuron phenotype is apparently elicited by a cell-autonomous mechanism, and cannot be readily explained based on our current model about the roles of Dscam in controlling axon arborization ( Fig. 5 B , G ). Two known mechanisms may suppress MB bifurcation at the peduncle end. First, the competition among self-branches for the available separate fascicles probably underlies the phenomenon that neurons can reliably make the correct numbers of branches based on the numbers of fascicles that project off the branch point. This may explain why MB α/β axons do not bifurcate when the α or β lobe is missing ( Wang et al., 2002 ). Second, promiscuous competition from non-self branches is thought to occur and, as a consequence, stop most axons from extending beyond the bifurcation point, when the endogenous Dscam gene loses its ectodomain diversity or a single-isoform Dscam transgene is ubiquitously expressed ( Wang et al., 2004 ; Zhan et al., 2004 ; Hattori et al., 2007 ). Both pathological conditions are caused by environmental factors through non-autonomous mechanisms. In contrast, in the clone-specific rescue experiments, the α and β lobes were both normal, and the Dscam transgene was only expressed in the neuron that exhibited the single-branch/neuron phenotype ( Fig. 5 G ). These results clearly suggest a novel cell-autonomous mechanism for Dscam in governing neurite arborization. Furthermore, it is unlikely to be due to excessive Dscam expression, since the UAS-transgenes are expressed at low levels in newborn single-cell MARCM clones, owing to the perdurance of GAL80 inherited from the heterozygous ganglion mother cells. In addition, overexpressing UAS-Dscam − 19 + 23 in wild-type MB α/β MARCM clones should increase the overall Dscam amount, but did not cause obvious single-branch/neuron phenotype ( Fig. 5 B ). Therefore, the suppression of axon bifurcation is likely to result from loss of Dscam ectodomain diversity in a single neuron. This suggests that the huge molecular diversity in the Dscam ectodomain is not only essential for self-recognition among numerous migrating growth cones but also critical to the behavior of an isolated growth cone. It is possible that the complexity of the expressed Dscam ectodomains in a given neuron at a given time may determine the strength of Dscam–Dscam homophilic signaling between the nascent split growth cones and, thus, help govern how divergently the sister growth cones should migrate away without compromising each other.

Together, we substantiate the presence of four possible Dscam endodomains and demonstrate that Dscams with specific endodomains support specific neural developmental processes. The identification and characterization of Dscam endodomains are essential for further elucidation of the roles of Dscam and its immense molecular diversity in neural development as well as the innate immunity of insects ( Watson et al., 2005 ). It also shed new light on how the diversity in the Dscam ectodomain may cell-autonomously govern neurite arborization in the development of Drosophila CNS.
