---
pmid: '11799106'
title: The non-ankyrin C terminus of Ikappa Balpha physically interacts with p53 in
  vivo and dissociates in response to apoptotic stress, hypoxia, DNA damage, and transforming
  growth factor-beta 1-mediated growth suppression.
authors:
- Chang NS
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC11104960
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M106607200
---

# The non-ankyrin C terminus of Ikappa Balpha physically interacts with p53 in vivo and dissociates in response to apoptotic stress, hypoxia, DNA damage, and transforming growth factor-beta 1-mediated growth suppression.
**Authors:** Chang NS
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M106607200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M106607200)
**PMC:** [PMC11104960](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11104960/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 22;277(12):10323-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M106607200. Epub 
2002 Jan 17.

The non-ankyrin C terminus of Ikappa Balpha physically interacts with p53 in 
vivo and dissociates in response to apoptotic stress, hypoxia, DNA damage, and 
transforming growth factor-beta 1-mediated growth suppression.

Chang NS(1).

Author information:
(1)Guthrie Research Institute, Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, Guthrie 
Medical Center, Sayre, Pennsylvania, 18840, USA. nschang@inet.guthrie.org

Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta1) suppresses the growth of mink lung 
Mv1Lu epithelial cells, whereas testicular hyaluronidase abolishes the growth 
inhibition. Exposure of Mv1Lu cells to TGF-beta1 rapidly resulted in 
down-regulation of cytosolic IkappaBalpha and hyaluronidase prevented this 
effect, suggesting a possible role of IkappaBalpha in the growth regulation. 
Ectopic expression of wild-type and dominant negative IkappaBalpha prevented 
TGF-beta1-mediated growth suppression. Nonetheless, the blocking effect of 
IkappaBalpha is not related to regulation of NF-kappaB function by its 
N-terminal ankyrin-repeat region (amino acids 1-243). Removal of the PEST 
(proline-glutamic acid-serine-threonine) domain-containing C terminus (amino 
acids 244-314) abolished the IkappaBalpha function, and the C terminus alone 
blocked the TGF-beta1 growth-inhibitory effect. Co-immunoprecipitation by 
anti-p53 antibody using Mv1Lu and other types of cells, as well as rat liver and 
spleen, revealed that a portion of cytosolic IkappaBalpha physically interacted 
with p53. In contrast, Mdm2, an inhibitor of p53, was barely detectable in the 
immunoprecipitates. The cytosolic p53 x IkappaBalpha complex rapidly dissociated 
in response to apoptotic stress, etoposide- and UV-mediated DNA damage, hypoxia, 
and TGF-beta1-mediated growth suppression. Also, a rapid increase in the 
formation of the nuclear p53 x IkappaBalpha complex was observed during exposure 
to etoposide and UV. In contrast, TGF-beta1-mediated promotion of fibroblast 
growth failed to mediate p53 x IkappaBalpha dissociation. Mapping by yeast 
two-hybrid showed that the non-ankyrin C terminus of IkappaBalpha physically 
interacted with the proline-rich region and a phosphorylation site, serine 46, 
in p53. Deletion of serine 46 or alteration of serine 46 to glycine abolished 
the p53 x IkappaBalpha interaction. Alteration to threonine retained the binding 
interaction, suggesting that serine 46 phosphorylation is involved in the p53 x 
IkappaBalpha complex formation. Functionally, enhancement of p53 apoptosis was 
observed when p53 and IkappaBalpha were transiently co-expressed in cells. 
Together, the IkappaBalpha x p53 complex plays an important role in responses 
involving growth regulation, apoptosis, and hypoxic stress.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M106607200
PMID: 11799106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The onco-suppressor p53 is a transcription factor that regulates a wide spectrum of genes involved in various cellular functions including apoptosis, cell cycle arrest, senescence, autophagy, DNA repair and angiogenesis. p53 and NF-κB generally have opposing effects in cancer cells. While p53 activity is associated with apoptosis induction, the stimulation of NF-κB has been demonstrated to promote resistance to programmed cell death. Although the transcription factor NF-κB family is considered as the master regulator of cancer development and maintenance, it has been mainly studied in relation to its ability to regulate p53. This has revealed the importance of the crosstalk between NF-κB, p53 and other crucial cell signaling pathways. This review analyzes the various mechanisms by which NF-κB regulates the activity of p53 and the role of p53 on NF-κB activity.

Introduction

The transcription factor p53 is one of the most studied tumor suppressors in almost all cancer types [ 1 , 2 ]. p53 pathway is activated by DNA damage, hypoxia or other stressors and it mainly induces cell cycle arrest, apoptosis and cellular senescence in response to these stimuli.

In addition to these responses, the p53 pathway regulate also bioenergetic balancing, inflammation and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Finally, p53 activation influences a set of proteins that can be directly involved in DNA damage repair process. For this reason, its activity is severely compromised in virtually every tumor for mutations in the p53 gene or by reversible inactivation [ 3 ]. The NF-κB family of transcription factors comprises five DNA-binding proteins with a central function in the regulator of immune response [ 4 – 6 ]. NF-κB proteins are frequently hyper-activated in cancer, where promote chronic inflammation, in turn favoring tumor development and chemo-resistance [ 7 ]. The crosstalk between p53 and NF-κB transcription factors has been extensively studied and it has been proved to have a key role in tumorigenesis [ 8 – 10 ].

Because the activation of NF-κB generally inhibits p53 function and vice versa, their relationship seems to be antagonistic [ 8 , 9 ]. However, their reciprocal regulation can have different outputs related to the context. For example, it has been shown that p53 regulation requires an intact NF-κB site in its promoter and that NF-κB induction by TNFα, or transient expression of the p65 subunit of NF-κB, activates p53 expression [ 11 ]. Moreover, in some cases p53 and NF-κB can cooperate in the regulation of apoptosis [ 12 ]. On the contrary, NF-κB can induce the expression of the E3 ubiquitin ligase Mdm2, thereby negatively regulating p53 stability and leading to p53 degradation through a ubiquitin-dependent mechanism [ 13 ]. The relationship between p53 and NF-κB can influence several important pathways in cancer cells: tumor cell metabolism, pro-inflammatory activity, DNA damage, mitochondrial function and ATP production [ 14 , 15 ] . Various mechanisms able to control NF-κB on p53 activity are indeed able to cooperate in different conditions. Here, we discuss some specific examples where NF-κB/p53 crosstalk can affect tumor cell properties.
