---
pmid: '1304358'
title: Amino acid sequence of fibrolase, a direct-acting fibrinolytic enzyme from
  Agkistrodon contortrix contortrix venom.
authors:
- Randolph A
- Chamberlain SH
- Chu HL
- Retzios AD
- Markland FS Jr
- Masiarz FR
journal: Protein Sci
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2142229
doi: 10.1002/pro.5560010505
---

# Amino acid sequence of fibrolase, a direct-acting fibrinolytic enzyme from Agkistrodon contortrix contortrix venom.
**Authors:** Randolph A, Chamberlain SH, Chu HL, Retzios AD, Markland FS Jr, Masiarz FR
**Journal:** Protein Sci (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pro.5560010505](https://doi.org/10.1002/pro.5560010505)
**PMC:** [PMC2142229](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2142229/)

## Abstract

1. Protein Sci. 1992 May;1(5):590-600. doi: 10.1002/pro.5560010505.

Amino acid sequence of fibrolase, a direct-acting fibrinolytic enzyme from 
Agkistrodon contortrix contortrix venom.

Randolph A(1), Chamberlain SH, Chu HL, Retzios AD, Markland FS Jr, Masiarz FR.

Author information:
(1)Chiron Research Laboratories, Chiron Corporation, Emeryville, California 
94608.

The complete amino acid sequence of fibrolase, a fibrinolytic enzyme from 
southern copperhead (Agkistrodon contortrix contortrix) venom, has been 
determined. This is the first report of the sequence of a direct-acting, 
nonhemorrhagic fibrinolytic enzyme found in snake venom. The majority of the 
sequence was established by automated Edman degradation of overlapping peptides 
generated by a variety of selective cleavage procedures. The amino-terminus is 
blocked by a cyclized glutamine (pyroglutamic acid) residue, and the sequence of 
this region of the molecule was determined by mass spectrometry. Fibrolase is 
composed of 203 residues in a single polypeptide chain with a molecular weight 
of 22,891, as determined by the sequence. Its sequence is homologous to the 
sequence of the hemorrhagic toxin Ht-d of Crotalus atrox venom and with the 
sequences of two metalloproteinases from Trimeresurus flavoviridis venom. 
Microheterogeneity in the sequence was found at both the amino-terminus and at 
residues 189 and 192. All six cysteine residues in fibrolase are involved in 
disulfide bonds. A disulfide bond between cysteine-118 and cysteine-198 has been 
established and bonds between cysteines-158/165 and between cysteines-160/192 
are inferred from the homology to Ht-d. Secondary structure prediction reveals a 
very low percentage of alpha-helix (4%), but much greater beta-structure 
(39.5%). Analysis of the sequence reveals the absence of asparagine-linked 
glycosylation sites defined by the consensus sequence: 
asparagine-X-serine/threonine.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.5560010505
PMCID: PMC2142229
PMID: 1304358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The complete amino acid sequence of fibrolase, a fibrinolytic enzyme from southern copperhead (Agkistrodon contortrix contortrix) venom, has been determined. This is the first report of the sequence of a direct-acting, nonhemorrhagic fibrinolytic enzyme found in snake venom. The majority of the sequence was established by automated Edman degradation of overlapping peptides generated by a variety of selective cleavage procedures. The amino-terminus is blocked by a cyclized glutamine (pyroglutamic acid) residue, and the sequence of this region of the molecule was determined by mass spectrometry. Fibrolase is composed of 203 residues in a single polypeptide chain with a molecular weight of 22,891, as determined by the sequence. Its sequence is homologous to the sequence of the hemorrhagic toxin Ht-d of Crotalus atrox venom and with the sequences of two metalloproteinases from Trimeresurus flavoviridis venom. Microheterogeneity in the sequence was found at both the amino-terminus and at residues 189 and 192. All six cysteine residues in fibrolase are involved in disulfide bonds. A disulfide bond between cysteine-118 and cysteine-198 has been established and bonds between cysteines-158/165 and between cysteines-160/192 are inferred from the homology to Ht-d. Secondary structure prediction reveals a very low percentage of alpha-helix (4%), but much greater beta-structure (39.5%). Analysis of the sequence reveals the absence of asparagine-linked glycosylation sites defined by the consensus sequence: asparagine-X-serine/threonine.
