---
pmid: '20881241'
title: trpm7 regulation of in vivo cation homeostasis and kidney function involves
  stanniocalcin 1 and fgf23.
authors:
- Elizondo MR
- Budi EH
- Parichy DM
journal: Endocrinology
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2999483
doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0853
---

# trpm7 regulation of in vivo cation homeostasis and kidney function involves stanniocalcin 1 and fgf23.
**Authors:** Elizondo MR, Budi EH, Parichy DM
**Journal:** Endocrinology (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1210/en.2010-0853](https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2010-0853)
**PMC:** [PMC2999483](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2999483/)

## Abstract

1. Endocrinology. 2010 Dec;151(12):5700-9. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0853. Epub 2010
Sep  29.

trpm7 regulation of in vivo cation homeostasis and kidney function involves 
stanniocalcin 1 and fgf23.

Elizondo MR(1), Budi EH, Parichy DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, 
USA.

The transient receptor potential melastatin 7 (trpm7) channel kinase is a 
primary regulator of magnesium homeostasis in vitro. Here we show that trpm7 is 
an important regulator of cation homeostasis as well as kidney function in vivo. 
Using zebrafish trpm7 mutants, we show that early larvae exhibit reduced levels 
of both total magnesium and total calcium. Accompanying these deficits, we show 
that trpm7 mutants express higher levels of stanniocalcin 1 (stc1), a potent 
regulator of calcium homeostasis. Using transgenic overexpression and morpholino 
oligonucleotide knockdown, we demonstrate that stc1 modulates both calcium and 
magnesium levels in trpm7 mutants and in the wild type and that levels of these 
cations are restored to normal in trpm7 mutants when stc1 activity is blocked. 
Consistent with defects in both calcium and phosphate homeostasis, we further 
show that trpm7 mutants develop kidney stones by early larval stages and exhibit 
increased levels of the anti-hyperphosphatemic factor, fibroblast growth factor 
23 (fgf23). Finally, we demonstrate that elevated fgf23 expression contributes 
to kidney stone formation by morpholino knockdown of fgf23 in trpm7 mutants. 
Together, these analyses reveal roles for trpm7 in regulating cation homeostasis 
and kidney function in vivo and implicate both stc1 and fgf23 in these 
processes.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2010-0853
PMCID: PMC2999483
PMID: 20881241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The transient receptor potential melastatin 7 (trpm7) channel kinase is a primary regulator of magnesium homeostasis in vitro . Here we show that trpm7 is an important regulator of cation homeostasis as well as kidney function in vivo . Using zebrafish trpm7 mutants, we show that early larvae exhibit reduced levels of both total magnesium and total calcium. Accompanying these deficits, we show that trpm7 mutants express higher levels of stanniocalcin 1 ( stc1 ), a potent regulator of calcium homeostasis. Using transgenic overexpression and morpholino oligonucleotide knockdown, we demonstrate that stc1 modulates both calcium and magnesium levels in trpm7 mutants and in the wild type and that levels of these cations are restored to normal in trpm7 mutants when stc1 activity is blocked. Consistent with defects in both calcium and phosphate homeostasis, we further show that trpm7 mutants develop kidney stones by early larval stages and exhibit increased levels of the anti-hyperphosphatemic factor, fibroblast growth factor 23 ( fgf23 ). Finally, we demonstrate that elevated fgf23 expression contributes to kidney stone formation by morpholino knockdown of fgf23 in trpm7 mutants. Together, these analyses reveal roles for trpm7 in regulating cation homeostasis and kidney function in vivo and implicate both stc1 and fgf23 in these processes.

Discussion

Our study links mutation of trpm7 to stc1 -dependent dysregulation of calcium and magnesium homeostasis and to fgf23 -dependent early larval kidney stone formation. We demonstrated that trpm7 mutants exhibit reduced total calcium and reduced total magnesium at 3 and 4 dpf, respectively. By transgenic overexpression and morpholino oligonucleotide knockdown, we found that stc1 can modulate both calcium and magnesium levels in zebrafish; up-regulated stc1 in a wild-type background decreases total calcium and total magnesium, whereas inhibition of stc1 translation increases these cations to wild-type levels in trpm7 mutants. We also showed that kidney stones, previously detected in trpm7 mutants at later larval stages ( 30 ), are evident by 5 dpf in the pronephros. Finally, we demonstrated that trpm7 mutants overexpress fgf23 , whereas knockdown of fgf23 reduces the incidence of kidney stones in the mutant background.

This study demonstrates an association between trpm7 and physiological cation homeostasis in vivo . The reduced total magnesium and total calcium evident in trpm7 mutants is similar to the hypomagnesemia and hypocalcemia resulting from Trpm6 defects in mammals: decreased magnesium absorption likely via both intestine and kidney leads to parathyroid failure with attendant defects in calcium homeostasis leading to hypocalcemia ( 14 , 28 , 60 , 61 , 62 , 63 ). In zebrafish trpm7 mutants, however, reduced total calcium is evident at 3 dpf, whereas reduced total magnesium is not detectable until 4 dpf. This reversal in onset raises the possibility that reduced total magnesium is secondary to reduced total calcium in trpm7 mutants. An explanation for this difference may reside in overall differences in mammalian and teleost physiology and the relationships of these organisms with their environments as well as differences in specific molecular mediators that remain to be elucidated

Our study revealed that trpm7 mutants exhibited higher levels of transcript for the anti-hypercalcemic factor stc1 and lower levels of calcium. Given that stanniocalcins are normally induced by high levels of serum calcium ( 50 , 64 ), our data highlight the dysregulation of normal homeostatic mechanisms in the trpm7 mutant background. These observations further raise the possibility of a direct or indirect genetic interaction by which trpm7 regulates stc1 . One possibility is that the kinase domain of trpm7 normally modulates the activity of Ca-sensing receptor (CaSR) within the CS. Consistent with this idea, a pharmacological activator of CaSR stimulates stc1 expression in salmon ( 65 ), and CaSR is expressed within the CS of flounder ( 49 ). Nevertheless, our data do not exclude the possibility that trpm7 effects on stc1 expression may be less direct and perhaps mediated through somatic tissues other than the CS. Indeed, it is also formally possible that increased stc1 expression in trpm7 mutants arises secondarily to decreased calcium and magnesium levels in this genetic background. Such an effect would run counter to the typical induction of stc1 by high calcium levels and would suggest a regulatory mechanism not previously described. The generation of transgenic lines to perturb trpm7 activity in a tissue-specific manner, and further studies to identify and characterize stanniocalcin 1 receptors and interactors will likely provide important insights into these questions.

An intriguing result from our study was the restoration of total magnesium levels in trpm7 mutants after morpholino knockdown of stc1 . In contrast to calcium, stanniocalcin expression is not modulated by magnesium, and stanniocalcins are not known to directly influence magnesium homeostasis ( 64 ). Nevertheless, our results are concordant with a previous study, which showed that activation of CaSR led to increased levels of stc1 and decreases not only in serum calcium but in serum magnesium as well ( 49 ). The trpm7 -independent correction of total magnesium levels we found implies a still-unknown mechanism for magnesium uptake. A potential mediator of such magnesium uptake in zebrafish would be claudin-16. In mammals, claudin-16 function in the loop of Henle is critical for passive, paracellular divalent cation reabsorption ( 66 ) and is distinct from the active, transcellular transport of magnesium by Trpm6/Trpm7 complexes. In zebrafish, we envision that claudin-16 may be regulated by stc1 and influences the paracellular transport of both magnesium and calcium in trpm7 mutants. The paracellular mechanism for claudin-16 transport is distinct from the transcellular mechanism of trpm6/trpm7 channels. Consequently, stc1-regulated claudin-16 activity could function as a trpm7 -independent compensatory mechanism. Although a zebrafish ortholog of claudin-16 has not been identified, the presence of such genes in other fishes ( 67 , 68 ) suggests one may yet be found.

Our study also provides insights into the development and physiological bases of kidney stone formation in trpm7 mutants. Consistent with a defect in phosphate homeostasis, we detected strongly increased expression of fgf23 in the CS, and we showed that knockdown of fgf23 reduces the incidence of kidney stone development. In humans, activating mutations in FGF23 cause autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets, and tumor-produced fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) results in osteomalacia ( 69 , 70 , 71 , 72 , 73 ), whereas mouse knockouts of Fgf23 develop hyperphosphatemia ( 74 , 75 ). Alterations in FGF23 signaling are also associated with several other pathologies including chronic kidney disease ( 58 ) and the presence of calcium-containing kidney stones in patients with hypophosphatemia and urinary phosphate wasting ( 59 ). In mammals, Fgf23 is produced primarily by bone and affects phosphate regulation by signaling through FGF receptor 1c and Klotho in the kidney ( 58 , 76 , 77 , 78 ). Our findings suggest that CS-derived fgf23 is an early regulator of phosphate homeostasis in zebrafish, although low absolute levels of phosphate precluded the direct detection of differences in phosphate levels between wild-type and trpm7 mutants. We speculate that kidney stone formation in the pronephric tubules may result from a localized decrease in the reabsorption of calcium, owing to reduced trpm7 channel activity, leading to increased precipitation of calcium phosphate. That fgf23 knockdown did not eliminate kidney stone formation completely may reflect limited morpholino efficacy at 5 dpf ( 79 ) or a dependence on other factors. One candidate for such an effect is stc1 . Although we did not observe a reduction in kidney stone incidence after injecting stc1 morpholino, either singly or in combination with fgf23 morpholino, and stc1 overexpression did not induce kidney stone formation in wild-type embryos, these outcomes may reflect limited perdurance of morpholinos as well as homeostatic regulation leading to resistance in the wild type that is absent or diminished in trpm7 mutants. Indeed, stc1 has been associated with phosphate homeostasis previously ( 49 , 80 ). The isolation of stc1 and fgf23 mutants by targeted resequencing of mutagenized genomes or other approaches ( 81 ) would greatly facilitate the testing of homeostatic roles for these factors at stages not amenable to morpholino perturbation.

Finally, we have characterized the early-larval effects of increased stc1 and fgf23 on cation homeostasis and kidney stone formation, respectively, but we anticipate that both of these factors may contribute to later-stage trpm7 mutant defects in growth and bone development as well ( 30 ). Studies of mammalian stanniocalcins and fgf23 have linked each to skeletal and growth defects ( 50 , 72 , 73 , 82 , 83 , 84 , 85 , 86 ) similar to those found in trpm7 mutants at later larval stages. Moreover, a mouse mutant for the trpm7 -related gene transient receptor potential vanilloid 5 ( Trpv5 ) exhibits urinary calcium and phosphate wasting as well as skeletal defects ( 87 , 88 ), and mice doubly mutant for Trpv5 and CaSR have growth retardation and develop kidney stones ( 89 ), much like zebrafish trpm7 mutants. It will be interesting to identify the other parallels between molecular regulators of these phenotypes in teleost and mammalian models as well as in human disease.
