---
pmid: '18948420'
title: Dscam guides embryonic axons by Netrin-dependent and -independent functions.
authors:
- Andrews GL
- Tanglao S
- Farmer WT
- Morin S
- Brotman S
- Berberoglu MA
- Price H
- Fernandez GC
- Mastick GS
- Charron F
- Kidd T
journal: Development
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2712571
doi: 10.1242/dev.023739
---

# Dscam guides embryonic axons by Netrin-dependent and -independent functions.
**Authors:** Andrews GL, Tanglao S, Farmer WT, Morin S, Brotman S, Berberoglu MA, Price H, Fernandez GC, Mastick GS, Charron F, Kidd T
**Journal:** Development (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.023739](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.023739)
**PMC:** [PMC2712571](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2712571/)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2008 Dec;135(23):3839-48. doi: 10.1242/dev.023739. Epub 2008 Oct 
23.

Dscam guides embryonic axons by Netrin-dependent and -independent functions.

Andrews GL(1), Tanglao S, Farmer WT, Morin S, Brotman S, Berberoglu MA, Price H, 
Fernandez GC, Mastick GS, Charron F, Kidd T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology/ms 314, University of Nevada, Reno, NV 89557, USA.

Developing axons are attracted to the CNS midline by Netrin proteins and other 
as yet unidentified signals. Netrin signals are transduced in part by Frazzled 
(Fra)/DCC receptors. Genetic analysis in Drosophila indicates that additional 
unidentified receptors are needed to mediate the attractive response to Netrin. 
Analysis of Bolwig's nerve reveals that Netrin mutants have a similar phenotype 
to Down Syndrome Cell Adhesion Molecule (Dscam) mutants. Netrin and Dscam 
mutants display dose sensitive interactions, suggesting that Dscam could act as 
a Netrin receptor. We show using cell overlay assays that Netrin binds to fly 
and vertebrate Dscam, and that Dscam binds Netrin with the same affinity as DCC. 
At the CNS midline, we find that Dscam and its paralog Dscam3 act redundantly to 
promote midline crossing. Simultaneous genetic knockout of the two Dscam genes 
and the Netrin receptor fra produces a midline crossing defect that is stronger 
than the removal of Netrin proteins, suggesting that Dscam proteins also 
function in a pathway parallel to Netrins. Additionally, overexpression of Dscam 
in axons that do not normally cross the midline is able to induce ectopic 
midline crossing, consistent with an attractive receptor function. Our results 
support the model that Dscam proteins function as attractive receptors for 
Netrin and also act in parallel to Frazzled/DCC. Furthermore, the results 
suggest that Dscam proteins have the ability to respond to multiple ligands and 
act as receptors for an unidentified midline attractive cue. These functions in 
axon guidance have implications for the pathogenesis of Down Syndrome.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.023739
PMCID: PMC2712571
PMID: 18948420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

In bilaterally symmetric nervous systems, many axons are guided to the midline of the central nervous system (CNS) by proteins of the Netrin family ( Hedgecock et al., 1990 ; Ishii et al., 1992 ; Serafini et al., 1994 ; Kennedy et al., 1994 ). In Drosophila , there are two redundant Netrin genes, NetA and NetB , and deletions of both lead to greatly reduced axon crossing of the midline ( Mitchell et al., 1996 ; Harris et al., 1996 ; Brankatschk and Dickson, 2006 ). Nevertheless, significant numbers of axons persist in orienting towards and crossing the midline in NetA,B mutants, pointing to the existence of additional attractive midline cues ( Hummel et al., 1999a ; Brankatschk and Dickson, 2006 ). The abl non-receptor tyrosine kinase appears to participate in all midline attractive systems, because null mutants lack all commissures ( Grevengoed et al., 2001 ), and Abl has been shown to function in Netrin signaling ( Forsthoefel et al., 2005 ). The phenotypes of other mutants lacking midline crossing, commissureless , schizo and elav/weniger , have all been traced to effects on the Robo/Slit midline repulsion system ( Onel et al., 2004 ; Keleman et al., 2005 ; Simionato et al., 2007 ). Therefore, despite extensive genetic screens (Seeger et al., 1993; Hummel et al., 1999b ), components of the missing midline attractive system have yet to be identified and represent a major challenge for our understanding of the formation of the Drosophila ventral nerve cord.

There is also evidence for an unidentified attractive Netrin receptor. The work which identified DCC (Deleted in Colorectal Cancer) as a Netrin receptor noted that some DCC positive axons do not show any responses to Netrin, and postulated that the presence of a co-receptor might be required ( Keino-Masu et al., 1996 ). The C. elegans DCC homologue, UNC-40, generally has mutant phenotypes less severe than UNC-6 (Netrin) mutants, suggesting the existence of a second pathway to respond to UNC-6 ( Chan et al., 1996 ). In Drosophila , a single DCC family member, frazzled ( fra ), is present ( Kolodziej et al., 1996 ). The fra (DCC) CNS phenotype is similar, but not identical to NetA,B deletions, as might be expected ( Brankatschk and Dickson, 2006 ; Garbe and Bashaw, 2007 ; Garbe et al., 2007 ). In addition, for both migrating salivary glands and Netrin-responsive motor axons, the frazzled ( fra ) mutant phenotypes are of lower penetrance than those of NetA,B deletions ( Kolesnikov and Beckendorf, 2005 ; Winberg et al., 1998 ; Labrador et al., 2005 ). Finally, two studies have provided convincing data that fra plays a non-autonomous role in axon guidance. In the embryo, the pioneer axon dMP2 has an altered trajectory in fra mutants; rescue of the mutant phenotype is not achieved by expression of fra in dMP2 alone, but requires expression by the cells encountered by the dMP2 axon ( Hiramoto et al., 2000 ). In retinal projections, loss of axonal fra has little effect on their pathfinding, but loss of fra in the target tissue, the lamina, cause dramatic errors ( Gong et al., 1999 ). In each case, Fra is thought to present Netrin to an unidentified receptor on the navigating axons.

The Drosophila Down Syndrome Cell Adhesion Molecule ( Dscam ) gene has been the focus of considerable attention due to the potential to encode 38,016 distinct protein isoforms through alternative splicing ( Schmucker et al., 2000 ; Wojtowitz et al., 2004; Zipursky et al., 2006 ). However, there is minimal alternative splicing in vertebrate Dscam genes, and in the three other Drosophila Dscam genes ( Yamakawa et al., 1998 ; Agarwala et al., 2001 ; Crayton et al., 2006 ). Given the evolutionary conservation of these molecules, this suggests that there is an important Dscam function that does not depend on molecular diversity. Genetic evidence in Drosophila also supports a diversity-independent function ( Chen et al., 2006 ; Hattori et al., 2007 ). Like Drosophila Dscam, vertebrate Dscams are capable of mediating homophilic cell adhesion ( Agarwala et al., 2000 , 2001 ). Knockdown of Dscam function in zebrafish leads to impaired cell movement, while perturbation of Dscam in the planarian disrupts cell migration, axon outgrowth and fasciculation ( Yimlamai et al., 2005 ; Fusaoka et al., 2006 ). The diversity of these phenotypes coupled with the previously noted similarity of Dscam to other axon guidance receptors ( Yamakawa et al., 1998 ), suggests that the primary Dscam function could be to respond to extracellular, perhaps diffusible ligands.

We found that Netrin mutants have similar phenotypes to Dscam mutants in Bolwig’s Nerve (the larval photoreceptor organ), suggesting that Dscam could function as a Netrin receptor. A physical interaction was confirmed in vitro using cell overlay assays. We also uncovered a subtle axon guidance defect in embryos mutant for one of the three additional Dscam genes in Drosophila , Dscam3 ( CG31190 ; Millard et al., 2007 ). Genetic interactions between Dscam , Dscam3 and the abl tyrosine kinase indicated a role for the Dscam genes in midline crossing. Genetic interactions with the Netrin receptor, fra , suggested that the Dscams function in a parallel pathway to Netrin signaling. We favor a novel model in which Dscams are required for the transduction of several different axon guidance and cell migration cues, most probably through combinatorial association with other receptors.

Discussion

It is known that axons are attracted to the CNS midline by Netrin proteins signaling through the DCC family of receptors. We have identified Dscam cell adhesion molecules as required for attraction to the midline in Drosophila . This was unexpected, as the role of Dscams in mediating repulsion between neurites has been well characterized ( Zipursky et al., 2006 ). In vertebrate retina formation, Dscams have been shown to mediate attraction ( Yamagata and Sanes, 2008 ) and repulsion ( Fuerst et al., 2008 ), suggesting that like other axon guidance molecules, the output of Dscams may be dependent on context, such as the presence or absence of co-receptors or downstream effectors. In vitro , Netrins bind Dscams in an evolutionarily conserved manner, with a similar affinity to the known Netrin receptor, DCC. In vivo , Dscam and the netrins genetically interact in a dose-sensitive manner in BN axon guidance. These data suggest that Dscam is a receptor required to mediate attraction to Netrin diffusing from the CNS midline and mesoderm.

The dramatic reduction in number of midline crossing axons in Dscam fra and Dscam fra Dscam3 mutant combinations, with defects significantly greater than seen in NetA,B mutants, suggests that Dscam responds to additional ligands as well as Netrin. In vertebrates, sonic hedgehog (Shh) has been identified as a Netrin-1 independent chemoattractant for commissural axons ( Charron et al., 2003 ). Drosophila hedgehog ( hh ) is required for the specification of the midline glia that commissural axons grow towards, but does not appear to be acting as a chemoattractant ( Hummel et al., 1999b ). Therefore, the missing midline chemoattractant(s) still remains to be identified, but we predict it will bind to Dscams. We favor the hypothesis that Dscams participate in both Netrin-dependent and independent pathways at the CNS midline.

A receptor role for Dscam was not entirely unexpected, as several groups had proposed the existence of a core molecular function for Dscam, independent of the diversity of protein isoforms ( Wang et al., 2004 ; Zhan et al., 2004 ; Chen et al., 2006 ). Each group attempted to rescue Dscam mutant phenotypes by transgenic expression of a single Dscam isoform, and achieved partial rescue of their phenotype of interest. (For a discussion of the role of diversity in Dscam function, see Zipursky et al., 2006 ). Based on rescue of adult mechanosensory neurons, Chen et al. (2006) hypothesized that the core function depends on a receptor-ligand interaction that may not engage the variable domains of the protein. Netrin binding could fulfill this role. As Netrin binding is evolutionarily conserved, we think that Netrin reception is likely to be independent of the Dscam diversity only found in insects. The ability of Dscam to mediate homophilic cell adhesion is also evolutionarily conserved ( Agarwala et al., 2000 ; Wojtowicz et al., 2007 ; Yamagata and Sanes, 2008 ). Our results place Dscam in the small group of cell surface molecules that can act as both receptors and mediate cell adhesion, as exemplified by the neural cell adhesion molecule NCAM ( Paratcha et al., 2003 ).

Conclusion

The evolutionary conservation of Dscams may be explained by their dual ability to act as cell adhesion molecules and as receptors. Dscams provide a new starting point for fully understanding Netrin signaling, as well as for identification of additional axon guidance cues. Dscam-associated phenotypes in DS can be reevaluated as a consequence of altered cell migration and axon guidance.
