---
pmid: '16572472'
title: CO2 limitation induces specific redox-dependent protein phosphorylation in
  Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.
authors:
- Turkina MV
- Blanco-Rivero A
- Vainonen JP
- Vener AV
- Villarejo A
journal: Proteomics
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/pmic.200500461
---

# CO2 limitation induces specific redox-dependent protein phosphorylation in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.
**Authors:** Turkina MV, Blanco-Rivero A, Vainonen JP, Vener AV, Villarejo A
**Journal:** Proteomics (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pmic.200500461](https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.200500461)

## Abstract

1. Proteomics. 2006 May;6(9):2693-704. doi: 10.1002/pmic.200500461.

CO2 limitation induces specific redox-dependent protein phosphorylation in 
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.

Turkina MV(1), Blanco-Rivero A, Vainonen JP, Vener AV, Villarejo A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.

Acclimation of the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii to limiting 
environmental CO2 induced specific protein phosphorylation at the surface of 
photosynthetic thylakoid membranes. Four phosphopeptides were identified and 
sequenced by nanospray quadrupole TOF MS from the cells acclimating to limiting 
CO2. One phosphopeptide originated from a protein that has not been annotated. 
We found that this unknown expressed protein (UEP) was encoded in the genome of 
C. reinhardtii. Three other phosphorylated peptides belonged to Lci5 protein 
encoded by the low-CO2-inducible gene 5 (lci5). The phosphorylation sites were 
mapped in the tandem repeats of Lci5 ensuring phosphorylation of four serine and 
three threonine residues in the protein. Immunoblotting with Lci5-specific 
antibodies revealed that Lci5 was localized in chloroplast and confined to the 
stromal side of the thylakoid membranes. Phosphorylation of Lci5 and UEP 
occurred strictly at limiting CO2; it required reduction of electron carriers in 
the thylakoid membrane, but was not induced by light. Both proteins were 
phosphorylated in the low-CO2-exposed algal mutant deficient in the 
light-activated protein kinase Stt7. Phosphorylation of previously unknown basic 
proteins UEP and Lci5 by specific redox-dependent protein kinase(s) in the 
photosynthetic membranes reveals the early response of green algae to limitation 
in the environmental inorganic carbon.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.200500461
PMID: 16572472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
