---
pmid: '22038833'
title: Disruption of cytokeratin-8 interaction with F508del-CFTR corrects its functional
  defect.
authors:
- Colas J
- Faure G
- Saussereau E
- Trudel S
- Rabeh WM
- Bitam S
- Guerrera IC
- Fritsch J
- Sermet-Gaudelus I
- Davezac N
- Brouillard F
- Lukacs GL
- Herrmann H
- Ollero M
- Edelman A
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3259015
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr496
---

# Disruption of cytokeratin-8 interaction with F508del-CFTR corrects its functional defect.
**Authors:** Colas J, Faure G, Saussereau E, Trudel S, Rabeh WM, Bitam S, Guerrera IC, Fritsch J, Sermet-Gaudelus I, Davezac N, Brouillard F, Lukacs GL, Herrmann H, Ollero M, Edelman A
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddr496](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddr496)
**PMC:** [PMC3259015](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3259015/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Feb 1;21(3):623-34. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr496. Epub 2011 Oct
 28.

Disruption of cytokeratin-8 interaction with F508del-CFTR corrects its 
functional defect.

Colas J(1), Faure G, Saussereau E, Trudel S, Rabeh WM, Bitam S, Guerrera IC, 
Fritsch J, Sermet-Gaudelus I, Davezac N, Brouillard F, Lukacs GL, Herrmann H, 
Ollero M, Edelman A.

Author information:
(1)Faculté de Médecine Paris-Descartes, INSERM, U845, Paris, France.

We have previously reported an increased expression of cytokeratins 8/18 
(K8/K18) in cells expressing the F508del mutation of cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). This is associated with increased 
colocalization of CFTR and K18 in the vicinity of the endoplasmic reticulum, 
although this is reversed by treating cells with curcumin, resulting in the 
rescue of F508del-CFTR. In the present work, we hypothesized that (i) the K8/K18 
network may interact physically with CFTR, and that (ii) this interaction may 
modify CFTR function. CFTR was immunoprecipitated from HeLa cells transfected 
with either wild-type (WT) CFTR or F508del-CFTR. Precipitates were subjected to 
2D-gel electrophoresis and differential spots identified by mass spectrometry. 
K8 and K18 were found significantly increased in F508del-CFTR precipitates. 
Using surface plasmon resonance, we demonstrate that K8, but not K18, binds 
directly and preferentially to the F508del over the WT human NBD1 
(nucleotide-binding domain-1). In vivo K8 interaction with F508del-CFTR was 
confirmed by proximity ligation assay in HeLa cells and in primary cultures of 
human respiratory epithelial cells. Ablation of K8 expression by siRNA in 
F508del-expressing HeLa cells led to the recovery of CFTR-dependent iodide 
efflux. Moreover, F508del-expressing mice topically treated with K8-siRNA showed 
restored nasal potential difference, equivalent to that of WT mice. These 
results show that disruption of F508del-CFTR and K8 interaction leads to the 
correction of the F508del-CFTR processing defect, suggesting a novel potential 
therapeutic target in CF.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddr496
PMCID: PMC3259015
PMID: 22038833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

We have previously reported an increased expression of cytokeratins 8/18 (K8/K18) in cells expressing the F508del mutation of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). This is associated with increased colocalization of CFTR and K18 in the vicinity of the endoplasmic reticulum, although this is reversed by treating cells with curcumin, resulting in the rescue of F508del-CFTR. In the present work, we hypothesized that (i) the K8/K18 network may interact physically with CFTR, and that (ii) this interaction may modify CFTR function. CFTR was immunoprecipitated from HeLa cells transfected with either wild-type (WT) CFTR or F508del-CFTR. Precipitates were subjected to 2D-gel electrophoresis and differential spots identified by mass spectrometry. K8 and K18 were found significantly increased in F508del-CFTR precipitates. Using surface plasmon resonance, we demonstrate that K8, but not K18, binds directly and preferentially to the F508del over the WT human NBD1 (nucleotide-binding domain-1). In vivo K8 interaction with F508del-CFTR was confirmed by proximity ligation assay in HeLa cells and in primary cultures of human respiratory epithelial cells. Ablation of K8 expression by siRNA in F508del-expressing HeLa cells led to the recovery of CFTR-dependent iodide efflux. Moreover, F508del-expressing mice topically treated with K8-siRNA showed restored nasal potential difference, equivalent to that of WT mice. These results show that disruption of F508del-CFTR and K8 interaction leads to the correction of the F508del-CFTR processing defect, suggesting a novel potential therapeutic target in CF.

INTRODUCTION

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is attributed to mutations in the gene coding for the chloride channel CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator) ( 1 , 2 ). This protein is composed of two transmembrane domains, two nucleotide-binding domains and one regulatory domain ( 3 ). Deletion of phenylalanine 508 (F508del) in the nucleotide-binding domain-1 (NBD1) is present in >70% of mutated alleles (Cystic Fibrosis Mutation Database, http://www.genet.sickkids.on.ca/app ). F508del produces a partially folded, core-glycosylated immature form that is largely retained and degraded in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) ( 4 ), but partially functional when it reaches the plasma membrane ( 5 ). This has prompted an intense search for small molecular correctors or protein substitution therapy ( 6 – 15 ). We have reported increased expression of cytokeratins 8/18 (K8/K18), which belong, respectively, to groups II and I of intermediate filaments (IF) ( 16 ) and are representative of one-layered epithelia ( 17 ), in HeLa cells expressing the F508del mutation ( 18 ). CFTR and K18 colocalization in the vicinity of the ER is reversed by curcumin, resulting in the rescue of F508del-CFTR ( 19 ). Likewise, the K18 network is altered by resveratrol, another molecule that rescues F508del-CFTR ( 20 ).

Two recent studies have revealed conformational changes within mutated NBD1. The first one shows experimentally that NBD1 destabilization occurs as a consequence of three solubilizing mutations, namely V510D, F494N and Q637R ( 21 ). The second study on NBD1 structure has revealed an increased conformational flexibility due to F508del ( 22 ). This may result in the exposure of buried hydrophobic region(s) that become(s) available for interaction with other molecules. We hypothesize that some of these interactions may contribute to F508del-CFTR retention and degradation and comprise the K8/K18 network. In accordance with these results, a very recent report shows that the mild KRT8 allele (K8) is associated with CFTR-mediated residual chloride secretion in F508del-CFTR homozygote patients, suggesting KRT8 as a modifier gene for CF severity CFTR mediated residual chloride secretion ( 23 ).

Based on these observations suggesting a determinant role for cytokeratin network in mutant CFTR misprocessing, we hypothesized that K8 and/or K18 interact physically with CFTR. The aim of the present work was to confirm this interaction and to study its biochemical basis and consequences on F508del-CFTR localization and function. Our results show that K8 preferentially binds to F508del-NBD1 over its wild-type (WT) counterpart, and that preventing this interaction in vivo leads to the functional plasma membrane expression of F508del-CFTR, both in cell lines and in F508del mice.

DISCUSSION

The present study delineates a previously unrecognized mechanism that contributes to the F508del-CFTR intracellular retention and strongly suggests that interaction between K8 and F508del-CFTR plays an important role in the ER retention of mutant CFTR. Compelling evidence supports our model. First, we demonstrate the interaction of K8 with CFTR, using immunoprecipitation and proteomics. Second, the direct interaction of purified K8 and NBD1 is reconstituted in vitro using SPR. Third, the in vitro interaction is stronger in the presence of F508del mutation and observable in F508del- but not in WT-CFTR-expressing cells by PLA. Fourth, inhibition of K8–CFTR interaction restores the F508del-CFTR Cl − channel function at the cell surface both in cultured cells and in the nasal respiratory epithelia of the F508del-CF mouse. Altogether, these four findings suggest that the network of IF plays a major role in the trafficking of CFTR between the different intracellular compartments.

Most of the effort in studying the functional link between cytoskeleton and CFTR has been focused so far on those proteins that participate in the actin network. Multiple immunoglobulin domains of filamin-A have been proven to interact with the N-terminus of CFTR ( 26 , 27 ), and suggested to play a role in the trafficking and membrane stability of the channel ( 28 ). Myosin VI, which plays a crucial role in CFTR endocytosis ( 29 , 30 ), establishes its interaction via the adaptor protein alpha-AP-2 ( 31 ). Likewise, a complex including the Na(+)/H(+) exchanger regulatory factor 1 (NHERF1) RhoA, Rho kinase, ezrin and actin would stabilize F508del-CFTR at the plasma membrane ( 15 ). Moreover, we have found ezrin expression increased in nasal epithelial cells (Jeanson et al ., manuscript under evaluation), and therefore available for this role. It is thus tempting to hypothesize that a dynamic cross-talk between the two cytoskeletal networks—actin and IF—and their respective interactions with CFTR could play a key role in determining CFTR membrane localization and functionality.

When addressing the presence of CFTR at the membrane, one crucial aspect is degradation and quality control. This ubiquitin-dependent mechanism involves chaperones, co-chaperones and ubiquitin ligases ( 32 ). Since cytokeratin degradation is mediated by a ubiquitin-proteasome machinery ( 33 ), it would be interesting to establish whether CFTR–K8 interaction plays a role in CFTR targeting towards the proteasome degradation mechanism.

One main issue in CF pathophysiology is the response of cells to inflammation. The CFTR network shown in Supplementary Material, Figure S3 and Table S4 gives a condensed view of the complexity underlying the links between inflammation, protein trafficking and ion transport processes. Only physical interactions are represented, which limits the number of proteins in the network, compared with a pioneering study on CFTR interactome ( 34 ). Our analysis shows that under normal conditions, CFTR is a node linking the eicosanoid inflammatory pathway to trafficking and ion transport (e.g. SLC26A3, PDZ-proteins, SNPA23, etc., Supplementary Material, Fig. S3A ) through direct interaction with S100A10. In the case of F508del-CFTR ( Supplementary Material, Fig. S3B ), when most of the CFTR is in the ER and other intracellular vesicles, and assuming that all the interactions presented in Supplementary Material, Figure 3SA still occur, it can be speculated that K8–F508del-CFTR interaction may determine a preponderance of ‘inflammatory connections’ over ‘trafficking connections’. Intriguingly, one of the reported direct interactions of K8/K18 is that with TNFR1. We have recently reported that TNFR1 is recruited in detergent-resistant microdomains (DRM) upon TNF-α stimulation in MDCK cells along with CFTR ( 35 ). This suggests that TNFR1 and CFTR would be present in the same macromolecular complex under certain conditions, along with other proteins that regulate the release of inflammatory mediators, such as ANXA1 and cPLA2 ( 36 ). We have recently shown a decreased expression of ANXA1 in cftr-knockout mice and in cells from CF patients ( 37 ), and an indirect interaction of this protein with NBD1 via the adaptor S100A10 ( 36 ). Interestingly, TNFR1 recruitment does not occur when CFTR lacks the TRL extremity, which contains the PDZ domain ( 35 ). Nevertheless, we have found K8 increased in DRM preparations from CFBE cells expressing F508del-CFTR when compared with DRM from cells expressing WT-CFTR (unpublished data). The latter raises the point of K8 playing a stabilizing role within the complex, and a potential role of this interaction in the regulation of the inflammatory signaling pathway initiated by TNF-α. Another link between K8 and inflammation in CF is brought about autophagy. In fact, upregulation of phosphorylated K8 is one of the markers of defective autophagy ( 38 ), and defective autophagy has been recently reported to drive lung inflammation in CF ( 39 ).

Supplementary Material, Figure S3C represents the protein network in the absence of CFTR. This network may reflect a situation at the plasma membrane for cells expressing F508del/F508del and/or stop mutations, and suggests the hypothesis that CFTR is a hub protein linking inflammation and ion transport pathways. In the absence of CFTR, the two networks are not connected (compare Supplementary Material, Fig. S3A, B and C ). Moreover, other nodes (STX1-SNPA23, PRKAA, ANXA5-ACTG1, DNAJA1, DNAJB1) are completely isolated in the absence of CFTR. This analysis represents, to our knowledge, the first clear-cut hypothesis linking inflammation, ion transport and trafficking in CF.

The importance of the K8/K18 network in the regulation of CFTR is strengthened in the context of the cell response to oxidative stress, which constitutes one of the major defects associated with CF ( 39 , 40 ). It has been recently reported that hypoxia induces the degradation and redistribution of cytokeratin intermediary filaments, which may be prevented by the superoxide dismutase/catalase mimetic EUK-134 ( 41 ). Because of the significance of oxidative stress responses in CF, it is tempting to hypothesize that ROS production in CF cells may be linked to the reorganization of K8 network, that modulation of ROS production may be helpful in the disruption of the unwanted interaction between F508del-CFTR and K8, and, in fine , in the correction of the functional defect of F508del-CFTR.

Silencing of genes has been attempted as a therapeutic strategy to ameliorate glomerulopathies ( 42 , 43 ) and skin disorders ( 44 – 46 ), to inhibit hepatitis virus infection ( 47 , 48 ) and Ebola virus infection ( 49 ), and suggested as an alternative strategy to treat cancer ( 50 , 51 ) and sepsis ( 52 ). Silencing of K8-mRNA has been tested experimentally. In a nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell line, a role of K8 in the resistance to the proapoptotic effect of cisplatin has been revealed ( 53 ). Likewise, K8 knockdown has been shown to attenuate resistance to cadmium in rat lung epithelial cells ( 54 ). In the cancer cell line MCF-7, siRNA of K8 leads to decreased migration and cell adhesion, and a reversal of their multidrug-resistant phenotype ( 55 – 57 ). However, to our knowledge, the current study represents the first attempt to modify K8 expression outside the cancer field. We have shown in a previous report the potential therapeutic effect of siRNA targeting of K18 in cells expressing a mutated form of CFTR ( 18 ). In that study, also performed on transfected HeLa cells, siRNA treatment against K18 revealed a cAMP-dependent anion conductance, consistent with CFTR activity, in F508del-expressing cells. This seminal result prompted the suggestion that the cytokeratin network could represent a potential therapeutic target in CF, which is the original hypothesis of the present work. We have also demonstrated that K8-siRNA leads to the recovery of CFTR function when the protein is mutated, and also points at the K8/K18 network as a target. The fact that silencing of either of the two cytokeratins leads to functional correction of the CFTR defect prompts the question of the role of K8/K18 interaction dynamics as a crucial subject in future research. Further research will be necessary to define the nature and sites of interaction between K8 and CFTR, and its functional implications in those manifestations of CF not directly linked to CFTR channel dysfunction, such as inflammation and oxidative stress.

In summary, our results provide new insights into the nature of the interaction of CFTR with the cytokeratin network. More importantly, our study suggests a potential therapy in CF consisting of the use of an siRNA-based approach targeting the interaction between K8 and F508del-CFTR. This is inferred from data showing a restoration of iodide efflux due to CFTR activity in transfected HeLa cells expressing the mutated form, and most notably, a restoration of ▵ V TE changes due to the activation of Cl − conductances in the nasal epithelium of mice expressing homozygously the F508del mutation. Nevertheless, as delivery of siRNA to the lungs represents a considerable challenge, further research will address pharmacological targeting of K8–CFTR interaction as well as the exploration of delivery vectors.
