---
pmid: '16983096'
title: Recruitment of the de novo DNA methyltransferase Dnmt3a by Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
  herpesvirus LANA.
authors:
- Shamay M
- Krithivas A
- Zhang J
- Hayward SD
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2006'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC1599998
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0604469103
---

# Recruitment of the de novo DNA methyltransferase Dnmt3a by Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus LANA.
**Authors:** Shamay M, Krithivas A, Zhang J, Hayward SD
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0604469103](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0604469103)
**PMC:** [PMC1599998](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1599998/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Sep 26;103(39):14554-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0604469103. Epub 2006 Sep 18.

Recruitment of the de novo DNA methyltransferase Dnmt3a by Kaposi's 
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus LANA.

Shamay M(1), Krithivas A, Zhang J, Hayward SD.

Author information:
(1)Viral Oncology Program, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

The Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus LANA protein is expressed in all 
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-infected cells, including the tumor 
cells of endemic and AIDS-associated Kaposi sarcoma, primary effusion lymphoma, 
and Castleman disease. LANA modulates cell gene expression, but the mechanisms 
of LANA-mediated transcriptional reprogramming are poorly understood. 
LANA-repressed cell genes were identified by using retroviral-transduced 
telomerase-immortalized microvascular endothelial cells. Transciptional 
repression of targeted genes was relieved by treatment with the 
methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, suggesting a role for DNA 
methylation in repression. We found that LANA coprecipitated with DNA 
methyltransferases (Dnmts) and recruited endogenous DNA methyltransferase 
activity from the cell extract. LANA preferentially relocalized Dnmt3a from the 
nuclear matrix into the chromatin fraction. Further, LANA associated with 
repressed cellular promoters, recruited Dnmt3a to DNA, and facilitated de novo 
promoter methylation of a down-regulated gene, cadherin 13 (H-cadherin). The 
data provide an example of promoter-specific epigenetic DNA modification through 
viral protein recruitment of de novo Dnmt activity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0604469103
PMCID: PMC1599998
PMID: 16983096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts 
declared.

## Full Text

Abstract

The Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus LANA protein is expressed in all Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-infected cells, including the tumor cells of endemic and AIDS-associated Kaposi sarcoma, primary effusion lymphoma, and Castleman disease. LANA modulates cell gene expression, but the mechanisms of LANA-mediated transcriptional reprogramming are poorly understood. LANA-repressed cell genes were identified by using retroviral-transduced telomerase-immortalized microvascular endothelial cells. Transciptional repression of targeted genes was relieved by treatment with the methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-2′-deoxycytidine, suggesting a role for DNA methylation in repression. We found that LANA coprecipitated with DNA methyltransferases (Dnmts) and recruited endogenous DNA methyltransferase activity from the cell extract. LANA preferentially relocalized Dnmt3a from the nuclear matrix into the chromatin fraction. Further, LANA associated with repressed cellular promoters, recruited Dnmt3a to DNA, and facilitated de novo promoter methylation of a down-regulated gene, cadherin 13 (H-cadherin). The data provide an example of promoter-specific epigenetic DNA modification through viral protein recruitment of de novo Dnmt activity.

Discussion

Epigenetic inactivation of cell genes is an integral feature of the development of cancer. The mechanisms that target DNA for CpG methylation by de novo Dnmts are incompletely understood and include structural features such as the presence of repeat sequences, the influence of flanking sequences on the substrate preferences of the de novo Dnmts, and specific targeting of the Dnmts through interaction with chromatin-interacting factors. In addition to the PML–RAR interaction with Dnmts, transcription factor targeting through c-Myc, Pu.1, and p53 has been described in refs. 40 – 42 . In the case of p53, the DNA methyltransferase activity of Dnmt3a was not required for p53-mediated repression of the p21 Cip1 gene, indicating that recruitment of the Dnmt3a-associated histone deacetylases can be sufficient for establishing repression. The interaction between KSHV LANA and Dnmts described here provides evidence for viral-induced retargeting of the de novo DNA methyltransferases. LANA relocalized Dnmt3a, and to a lesser extent Dnmt3b, from the nuclear matrix into chromatin, increased plasmid CpG methylation associated with cotransfected Dnmt3a, specifically increased the association of Dnmt3a with the CCND2 promoter, and increased CpG methylation of a cellular promoter, that for cadherin 13.

The LANA repressed genes CCND2, LDHB, and CREG were dramatically derepressed by treatment with the methyltransferase inhibitor AZA, indicating that a subset of LANA-repressed genes are highly reliant on recruitment of Dnmt activity. The de novo CpG methylation induced in the CDH13 promoter in LANA-expressing TIME cells was less dense than that seen in the CDH13 promoter in PEL cells. This difference may derive from growth of LANA-expressing cells in tissue culture versus long-term tumor selection. However, it should be noted that methylation of a single nucleotide can be sufficient for promoter repression ( 43 ). Alternatively, LANA-mediated repression may represent a coordination of CpG methylation with other protein–protein interactions that produce profound transcriptional repression without the requirement for dense DNA methylation. Introduction of a small number of CpG methylations at sites that had the preferred environment for Dnmt3a ( 44 ) would produce binding sites for the methyl CpG-binding protein MeCP2, which also interacts with LANA ( 24 ). LANA, MeCP2, and Dnmts each interact with HDACs ( 21 , 45 , 46 ). An additional coordination between DNA methylation and repressive histone modifications would be provided by LANA- and MeCP2-mediated recruitment of the histone methyltransferase SUV39H1 ( 25 , 47 ), which introduces histone H3 K9 modifications. The ability of LANA to interact with this set of proteins thus would generate a very strong localized repressive environment. This model leaves open the question of how LANA itself is targeted to promoters. LANA associated with the endogenous CCND2, CDH13, and CREG promoters in ChIP analyses. The recognized LANA interactions with chromatin-associated proteins such as MeCP2, DEK ( 24 ), core histones ( 8 ), or Brd2/RING3 ( 48 ) would not individually provide specificity, but LANA also has been found to interact with transcription factors such as Sp1 and CBF1/RBP-Jk ( 49 , 50 ), and combinatorial interactions are likely to be involved in promoter-specific LANA targeting. The Dnmt3a interaction required the same region of LANA that has been implicated in binding of MeCP2 and core histones. However, the ability of Dnmt proteins generated in a cytosolic in vitro translation system to bind to bacterially expressed LANA suggests that the Dnmt proteins can contact LANA directly.

The LANA-repressed gene CDH13 is down-regulated through methylation in breast cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, colorectal cancer, invasive squamous cell carcinoma, and chronic myeloid leukemia ( 38 , 51 – 54 ). Promoter methylation and loss of expression of lactate dehydrogenase B has been described in prostate and gastric cancers ( 55 , 56 ), and promoter hypermethylation of the CCND2 gene occurs in several cancers including prostate ( 57 ), acute lymphoblastic leukemia ( 58 ), and breast ( 59 ). The loss of expression of these genes in cancers through epigenetic modification strengthens the biological relevance of the LANA-mediated repression. CREG is relatively uncharacterized, and its regulation in human cancers has not been addressed. CREG binds to pRb in vitro and inhibits activation by E2F ( 60 ). E2F-responsive genes are up-regulated by LANA and, hence, repression of CREG would reinforce E2F responses in KSHV-infected cells. Moderately LANA-repressed genes such as SMARCA3 showed little response to AZA treatment, indicating that LANA also mediates repression through other, possibly indirect, mechanisms.

Virus infection has been linked to increased expression of DNA methyltransferases in cells infected with HIV-1 ( 61 ), hepatitis B virus ( 62 ), the human polyomavirus BKV, adenovirus ( 63 ), and Epstein–Barr virus ( 64 ). The interaction between KSHV LANA and Dnmts described here, and the evidence for viral protein-targeted CpG methylation, raise the possibility of a broader role for viruses in epigenetic modification in human cancers. Further, CpG methylation is known to be a factor in establishment of viral latency by contributing to transcriptional down-regulation of immunological targets and key viral lytic cycle regulators such as the KSHV RTA protein. Viral-directed CpG methylation also could place this aspect of immune evasion and latency maintenance under viral control.
