---
pmid: '21399614'
title: Novel asymmetrically localizing components of human centrosomes identified
  by complementary proteomics methods.
authors:
- Jakobsen L
- Vanselow K
- Skogs M
- Toyoda Y
- Lundberg E
- Poser I
- Falkenby LG
- Bennetzen M
- Westendorf J
- Nigg EA
- Uhlen M
- Hyman AA
- Andersen JS
journal: EMBO J
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC3102290
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.63
---

# Novel asymmetrically localizing components of human centrosomes identified by complementary proteomics methods.
**Authors:** Jakobsen L, Vanselow K, Skogs M, Toyoda Y, Lundberg E, Poser I, Falkenby LG, Bennetzen M, Westendorf J, Nigg EA, Uhlen M, Hyman AA, Andersen JS
**Journal:** EMBO J (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2011.63](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2011.63)
**PMC:** [PMC3102290](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3102290/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2011 Apr 20;30(8):1520-35. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.63. Epub 2011 Mar
11.

Novel asymmetrically localizing components of human centrosomes identified by 
complementary proteomics methods.

Jakobsen L(1), Vanselow K, Skogs M, Toyoda Y, Lundberg E, Poser I, Falkenby LG, 
Bennetzen M, Westendorf J, Nigg EA, Uhlen M, Hyman AA, Andersen JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern 
Denmark, Odense, Denmark.

Centrosomes in animal cells are dynamic organelles with a proteinaceous matrix 
of pericentriolar material assembled around a pair of centrioles. They organize 
the microtubule cytoskeleton and the mitotic spindle apparatus. Mature 
centrioles are essential for biogenesis of primary cilia that mediate key 
signalling events. Despite recent advances, the molecular basis for the plethora 
of processes coordinated by centrosomes is not fully understood. We have 
combined protein identification and localization, using PCP-SILAC mass 
spectrometry, BAC transgeneOmics, and antibodies to define the constituents of 
human centrosomes. From a background of non-specific proteins, we distinguished 
126 known and 40 candidate centrosomal proteins, of which 22 were confirmed as 
novel components. An antibody screen covering 4000 genes revealed an additional 
113 candidates. We illustrate the power of our methods by identifying a novel 
set of five proteins preferentially associated with mother or daughter 
centrioles, comprising genes implicated in cell polarity. Pulsed labelling 
demonstrates a remarkable variation in the stability of centrosomal protein 
complexes. These spatiotemporal proteomics data provide leads to the further 
functional characterization of centrosomal proteins.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.63
PMCID: PMC3102290
PMID: 21399614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Centrosomes in animal cells are dynamic organelles with a proteinaceous matrix of pericentriolar material assembled around a pair of centrioles. They organize the microtubule cytoskeleton and the mitotic spindle apparatus. Mature centrioles are essential for biogenesis of primary cilia that mediate key signalling events. Despite recent advances, the molecular basis for the plethora of processes coordinated by centrosomes is not fully understood. We have combined protein identification and localization, using PCP-SILAC mass spectrometry, BAC transgeneOmics, and antibodies to define the constituents of human centrosomes. From a background of non-specific proteins, we distinguished 126 known and 40 candidate centrosomal proteins, of which 22 were confirmed as novel components. An antibody screen covering 4000 genes revealed an additional 113 candidates. We illustrate the power of our methods by identifying a novel set of five proteins preferentially associated with mother or daughter centrioles, comprising genes implicated in cell polarity. Pulsed labelling demonstrates a remarkable variation in the stability of centrosomal protein complexes. These spatiotemporal proteomics data provide leads to the further functional characterization of centrosomal proteins.

Introduction

The definition of the components of large non-membranous organelles, their relative abundance, and their turnover rates, are important, but unsolved goals in cell biology. Generally, organelles cannot be purified to homogeneity and methods are required to determine the actual components. Furthermore, the components change through the cell cycle and development. In an attempt to address these challenges, we focused on the centrosome which is a dynamic cell organelle with a proteinaceous matrix of pericentriolar material assembled around a pair of centrioles. The single centrosome present in G1-phase cells is usually positioned near the nucleus where it organizes microtubules that coordinate the shape, polarity, adhesion, and mobility of the cell, and facilitates intracellular transport and positioning of the organelles ( Doxsey, 2001 ; Bornens, 2002 ; Nigg, 2002 ). Centrosomes at this stage harbour a daughter centriole and a mature mother centriole. The mature centriole has the ability to function as a basal body that seeds the growth of a primary cilium protruding from the cell surface. In multiciliated epithelial cells, de novo assembled basal bodies nucleate motile cilia important for fluid flow and cell migration ( Satir and Christensen, 2007 ). It is now clear that primary cilia are sensory organelles that regulate signalling pathways such as sonic hedgehog and Wnt/planar cell polarity pathways, which in turn regulate essential cellular and developmental processes. The significance of sensory cilia is underlined by the recent findings that mutations affecting genes essential for their formation or function can lead to a number of severe human diseases and developmental defects, now known as the ‘ciliopathies’ ( Fliegauf et al, 2007 ).

During the S-phase of the cell cycle, the centrosome duplicates by the formation of procentrioles adjacent to each of the two parental centrioles. At the G2-M transition, the microtubule-nucleating capacities are increased by the recruitment of γ-tubulin ring complexes (γ-TuRCs) before the centrosomes separate and promote the formation of spindle asters and the positioning of the two spindle poles important for chromosome and centrosome segregation during mitosis. The duplication and segregation cycles of centrosomes and chromosomes are coordinated to avoid the numerical aberration of centrosomes, the missegregation of chromosomes, and the ploidy changes that are typical features of human tumours ( Nigg, 2006 ). Moreover, the equal segregation of one centrosome per cell ensures that each cell has the potential to grow a single primary cilium ( Tsou and Stearns, 2006 ). Plurifunctional roles in cell division are further supported by multiple lines of evidence, suggesting that the centrosome also contributes to cell-cycle regulation and checkpoints, asymmetric division and fate of sister cells, and acts as a scaffold for additional regulatory processes in the cell ( Doxsey, 2001 ; Doxsey et al, 2005 ; Wang et al, 2009 ).

Information about the protein composition of centrosomes and centrosome-related structures has been obtained through the application of proteomics, genomics, and bioinformatics in various eukaryotic cells ( Bettencourt-Dias and Glover, 2007 ). The yeast spindle poles were the first to be characterized by mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics ( Wigge et al, 1998 ). This study has been followed by the proteomic analyses of centrosomes from human lymphoblast cells ( Andersen et al, 2003 ), the midbody from Chinese hamster ovary cells ( Skop et al, 2004 ), the mitotic spindle from synchronized HeLa S3 cells ( Sauer et al, 2005 ), in vitro -assembled spindle structures from Xenopus and HeLa cell extracts ( Liska et al, 2004 ), and the centrosome of Dictyostelium discoideum ( Reinders et al, 2006 ). Proteomic studies have also revealed the composition of ciliary and flagellar structures including the human ciliary axoneme ( Ostrowski et al, 2002 ), the mouse photoreceptor sensory cilium complex ( Liu et al, 2007 ), the flagellum and basal body of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii ( Keller et al, 2005 ; Pazour et al, 2005 ), and the flagellum of Trypanosoma brucei ( Broadhead et al, 2006 ). The cilia and flagella studies have been complemented by comparative genomics to identify genes that exist exclusively in organisms that have basal bodies and cilia ( Li et al, 2004 ; Chen et al, 2006 ; Baron et al, 2007 ; Merchant et al, 2007 ). Taken together, these efforts have revealed candidate proteins associated with the centrosome, the centrioles, the mitotic spindle, midbody, and the cilium, some of which have been validated through localization ( Andersen et al, 2003 ; Keller et al, 2005 ; Sauer et al, 2005 ) and RNA interference studies ( Graser et al, 2007a ; Lawo et al, 2009 ).

The above findings illustrate how different strategies have contributed to the identification of >100 proteins associated with the centrosome leading to functional insight and molecular understanding of genetic disorders ( Chang et al, 2006 ; Sayer et al, 2006 ; Valente et al, 2006 ; den Hollander et al, 2006 ; Spektor et al, 2007 ; Graser et al, 2007a , 2007b ; Nigg and Raff, 2009 ). Despite these advances, many unsolved questions regarding centrosome and cilia function remain. For example, while the studies described above have revealed the identity of cilia and centrosomes components, we still do not know how most of these components dynamically localize, interact, and function at the molecular, cellular, and organismal level. Likewise, the causative gene in families with ciliopathies is unknown in most cases, suggesting that additional genes expected to be associated with cilia or centrosomes remain to be identified ( Otto et al, 2010 ).

To address these questions, we describe here the combined use of complementary proteomics strategies based on MS and microscopy to further explore the localization, abundance, and turnover of centrosomal proteins. The combined efforts resulted in a more comprehensive coverage of the human centrosome proteome than previously reported, comprising known and novel components. The advancement was made possible by the availability of affinity purified antibodies form the Human Protein Atlas (HPA) project ( Barbe et al, 2008 ) and by the development of a novel MS-based proteomics method, which improved the confidence in identifying genuine organelle components from a background of non-specific proteins. Candidates were validated by image analyses of cells stably expressing fluorescently tagged fusion proteins at the endogenous level employing BAC TransgeneOmics ( Poser et al, 2008 ). Additional microscopy and MS-based experiments revealed the dynamic and asymmetric association of novel proteins with the mother and daughter centriole. The resulting spatiotemporal proteomics data are likely to provide leads to further insight into the functional significance of centrosome-associated proteins.

Complementary proteomics methods identify novel centrosomal proteins

To evaluate the dynamic composition and localization of the centrosome proteome with the ultimate goal to better understand its structure and function we carried out two complementary screens. In the ‘MS-screen’, we developed an MS-based proteomics method to selectively identify centrosomal proteins from a background of unrelated proteins typically present in preparations of biochemically purified centrosomes. In the ‘HPA-screen’, we identified additional components localizing to the centrosomes by evaluating confocal images of three different cell lines stained with HPA antibodies ( Barbe et al, 2008 ). An outline of the two screens and the follow-up experiments performed to validate and further characterize the identified candidate proteins are summarized in Figure 1A . The resulting data are visualized as a dynamic network of proteins associated with the centrosome and its substructures ( Figure 1B ).

Discussion

MS and microscopy-based proteomics have the ability to provide functional insight when applied to the analysis of multiprotein complexes. Inventory analysis by fluorescence microscopy requires the availability of antibodies or cell pools expressing GFP-fusion proteins and is dependent on the quality, in vivo behaviour, and detectability of these reagents. Inventory analysis by MS is challenged by lists of proteins crowded with unrelated entries in the midst of genuine components, even when analysing high-purity preparations. As a consequence, the identified proteins provide corroborating rather than unequivocal evidence of organelle association. We have developed a quantitative proteomics method termed PCP-SILAC and demonstrated its ability to distinguish genuine organelle components from co-purifying contaminants. In combination with an antibody-based screen, we have obtained a more extensive coverage of the human centrosome proteome than hitherto available. In support of the method, 126 previously reported centrosomal proteins, including several candidates reported in the course of this study, were identified in the MS-screen.

We tested the subcellular localization for known centrosomal proteins and found that 31 co-localize with γ-tubulin. Importantly, we successfully validated 22 of 40 candidate proteins identified in the MS-screen. Previously uncharacterized proteins were termed CEP of x kDa, where CEP stands for centrosomal protein and x is the molecular weight calculated from the full-length sequence ( Table I ). Sequence analysis of the identified candidates revealed proteins with predicted coiled-coil domains, including the validated proteins CCDC21, CCDC45, and CCDC46. Among the proteins identified with a complete centrosomal enrichment profile there is a propensity for this domain structure (60%), which seems to be important in centrosome organization.

Several parameters contribute to the reliability of the PCP-SILAC method as compared with other methods based on protein fractionation behaviour. Most importantly, the introduction of SILAC enhances the confidence in the determination of protein enrichment profiles by increasing the quantitation accuracy. The gain in accuracy is mainly related to the intensities and number of signal intensity ratios that contribute to the profile determination as compared with methods such as iTRAQ and label-free quantitation ( Supplementary Figure S3 ). Other advantages of PCP-SILAC include facilitated peptide detection and retention time correlation by the constant signal of the internal standard in all fractions and the additional information provided by enrichment profiles as compared with standardized abundance profiles obtained by other methods. We observed that even a single distinct ratio of enrichment in the peak fraction was indicative of organelle classification and that a complete profile from one or two experiments translated into a clear distinction between genuine components and co-purifying non-specific proteins. We have shown that the PCP-SILAC method allows for the analysis of a variable number of fractions, which imply that experiments can be designed to achieve a peak capacity sufficiently high to resolve structures of interest. This possibility is attractive if the coverage of the gradient is extended with the purpose of profiling multiple organelles. We anticipate, however, that the relative ratio of enrichment and the proportion of other proteins introduced by the internal standard might increase to a point where a better choice would be to cover the gradient with several PCP-SILAC experiments.

Despite these advances, we estimate that the centrosome proteome described above is incomplete. Proteins identified by MS-based proteomics are limited to those that survive the isolation procedure and fulfil stringent quantification and database search criteria. Operationally, these proteins can be defined as the core centrosome proteome derived from a single asynchronous cell system from which centrosomes are readily isolated. The majority of these core components were successfully validated by centrosome co-localization experiments using antibodies and cell pools stably expressing GFP-tagged proteins. Comparable success rates were obtained for known and novel centrosomal proteins and were mainly limited by low signal intensity or indistinct staining patterns for a subset of the cell pools making it difficult to confirm or exclude centrosome association with certainty for all candidates.

We challenged the completeness of the centrosome proteome by a complementary antibody-based screen in three different cell lines and identified an additional 113 potential candidates. The reasons for this large number of additional candidate proteins might be related to the ability of antibodies to detect proteins of low abundance, proteins loosely associated with centrosomes, and proteins associated with centrosomes in a microtubule or cell-cycle-dependent manner. Conversely, proteins identified by the HPA-screen might represent cases of incorrect annotation caused by antibodies cross-reacting with epitopes on different proteins ( Nigg et al, 1982 ). Analysis of 30 previously reported centrosomal proteins was useful to benchmark the quality of the HPA antibodies and to arrive at annotation criteria that take into account the diverse staining patterns observed for known centrosomal proteins. As expected, the most successful group of validated candidates stained two fine dots at interphase as compared with candidates staining a more diffuse area near the centrosome. Although we confirmed γ-tubulin co-localization for a subset of the identified HPA candidates in the presence and absence of nocodazole, further experiments are necessary to validate antibody specificity and to annotate accurate subcellular localization for all the HPA candidates. Obvious experiments are staining before and after knockdown and counterstaining with a more diverse set of centrosomal markers such as PCM1 staining centrosomal satellites.

In contrast to other organelles, centrosomes stay assembled throughout the cell cycle and are expected to vary considerably in composition because of their plurifunctional capabilities. We observed candidate proteins with large ratio of pulsed labelling that also varied in their centrosome association during the cell cycle (e.g., KIAA0562, CCDC21, Albatross, and MPHOSPH9). Both parameters are indicative of regulated proteins. For example, the M-phase phosphoprotein MPHOSPH9 ( Matsumoto-Taniura et al, 1996 ) appears to localize to the distal and proximal end of centriole pairs in duplicated centrosomes. Following centrosome splitting the protein was no longer visible, suggesting that it has a role in the early steps of the centrosome cycle. Dissociation of MPHOSPH9 from the distal end of the mother centriole in ciliated cells suggests that it might have a role in ciliogenesis. The coiled-coil containing protein CCDC21 stained interphase centrosomes rather weakly and more clearly nucleoli. Upon entry into mitosis, CCDC21 relocated from nucleoli and accumulated at spindle poles ( Supplementary Figure S8 ). These observations suggest that CCDC21 might be a spatially regulated maturation factor similar to the CDC14B phosphatase ( Shou et al, 1999 ).

Interestingly, we also identified several proteins associated asymmetrically to the mother or daughter centriole in a cell-cycle-dependent manner. This is a distinct feature of a relative small group of proteins comprising CEP164 ( Graser et al, 2007a ), Cenexin/ODF2 ( Lange and Gull, 1995 ), CEP170 ( Guarguaglini et al, 2005 ), NIN ( Piel et al, 2000 ), Nlp, CEP110, CNTROB ( Zou et al, 2005 ), PARP-3 ( Augustin et al, 2003 ), TUBE1 ( Chang and Stearns, 2000 ), APC and EB1 ( Louie et al, 2004 ) and Cep120 ( Mahjoub et al, 2010 ). We observed by fluorescence microscopy that C14orf145, Albatross, and C3orf34 localize to the mature mother centriole, akin to CEP170 and CEP164 that localize to the appendage structures of the mature centriole. Thus, it will be interesting to test if they share a structural or functional role in the formation or function of cilia such as microtubule anchoring or selective transport of molecules into and out of the cilium through a cilium gate. Our data suggest that PRICKLE3 associates with older centrosomes. PRICKLE3 shares the Prickle, Espinas, and Testin and LIN-11, Isl1, and MEC-3 domain structure of the planar cell polarity pathway components PRICKLE1 and PRICKLE2, but lacks the C-terminal Prickle domain. PRICKLE3 is uncharacterized but its sequence features and localization pattern suggest a role in cell polarity determination. A relationship to cell polarization has also been reported for other candidate proteins, for example, SCRIB ( Qin et al, 2005 ), CCDC66 ( Dekomien et al, 2010 ), and Albatross ( Sugimoto et al, 2008 ). The identification of asymmetrically localized centriolar proteins (PRICKLE3, Albatross, C3orf34, C14orf145, BTN3A3, and MPHOSPH9) is also interesting in light of recent findings, which implicate differently aged centrioles in asymmetric cell division ( Piel et al, 2001 ; Yamashita et al, 2007 ). Thus, proteins selectively associated with the mature mother centriole could be important for cell polarization and stem cell fate determination via asynchronous microtubule anchorage activity, spindle orientation, and primary cilium growth leading to biased signalling in sister cells ( Anderson and Stearns, 2009 ).

Proteins co-purifying with centrosomes were compared with proteins reported in other proteomics studies ( Supplementary Table S4 ). The best overlap with 65 shared proteins was found in the study of the mouse photoreceptor sensory cilium complex ( Liu et al, 2007 ). The shared proteins indicate good coverage in both studies and suggest that a large number of centrosomal proteins remain associated with the basal body despite photoreceptor sensory cilium specialization. The 32 proteins shared with the human spindle proteome ( Sauer et al, 2005 ) were mainly microtubule associated and did not include novel candidates. In the course of this study, several of the identified candidate proteins were validated in protein–protein interaction and localization studies, for example by the Mitocheck consortium ( Hutchins et al, 2010 ). In particular, most of our previously reported centrosomal candidates ( Andersen et al, 2003 ) were targeted for analysis with a positive outcome. This is also the case for the human homologues of the Chlamydomonas centriolar proteins POC1/WDR51, POC5/C5orf37, POC11/CCDC77, POC18/WDR67, and POC19a/FAM161a ( Keller et al, 2005 , 2009 ), which illustrates the evolutionary conservation of centrosomal and cilia proteins. Global analyses of phenotypes induced by knockdown using RNAi ( Kittler et al, 2007 ; Neumann et al, 2010 ) provide functional insight for several of the identified centrosomal proteins. Phenotypes among the known centrosomal proteins were mainly observed for proteins necessary for centrosome duplication such as PLK4, CEP192, CEP135, and SAS-6, and for proteins with a role in microtubule organization such as dynactins, and subunits of the γ-TuRC and HAUS complexes. Phenotypes among the candidates include CCDC123, CCDC34, and C7orf47, which appear to undergo apoptosis upon knockdown, and WDR90 and CCDC21 having cell division defects.

In conclusion, the PCP-SILAC method presented here is a generic method to better define the core protein composition of single organelles and has the potential to classify proteins to multiple structures within the cell simultaneously ( Foster et al, 2006 ; Lilley and Dunkley, 2008 ). The resulting data sets facilitate future structural and functional experiments including quantitative proteomics approaches to follow in time how localizations, modifications, and interaction partners change under different physiological conditions ( Andersen and Mann, 2006 ; Mann, 2006 ; Lam et al, 2007 ). Together with the candidates identified by the HPA-antibody screen, it is our hope that the centrosome proteome presented here will provide functional leads to a better understanding of the multitude of activities associated with this important cellular structure.
