---
pmid: '18413740'
title: DNA methyltransferase 1 and 3B activate BAG-1 expression via recruitment of
  CTCFL/BORIS and modulation of promoter histone methylation.
authors:
- Sun L
- Huang L
- Nguyen P
- Bisht KS
- Bar-Sela G
- Ho AS
- Bradbury CM
- Yu W
- Cui H
- Lee S
- Trepel JB
- Feinberg AP
- Gius D
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2733164
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6654
---

# DNA methyltransferase 1 and 3B activate BAG-1 expression via recruitment of CTCFL/BORIS and modulation of promoter histone methylation.
**Authors:** Sun L, Huang L, Nguyen P, Bisht KS, Bar-Sela G, Ho AS, Bradbury CM, Yu W, Cui H, Lee S, Trepel JB, Feinberg AP, Gius D
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6654](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6654)
**PMC:** [PMC2733164](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2733164/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 2008 Apr 15;68(8):2726-35. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6654.

DNA methyltransferase 1 and 3B activate BAG-1 expression via recruitment of 
CTCFL/BORIS and modulation of promoter histone methylation.

Sun L(1), Huang L, Nguyen P, Bisht KS, Bar-Sela G, Ho AS, Bradbury CM, Yu W, Cui 
H, Lee S, Trepel JB, Feinberg AP, Gius D.

Author information:
(1)Radiation Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

In a previous genomic analysis, using somatic methyltransferase (DNMT) knockout 
cells, we showed that hypomethylation decreased the expression of as many genes 
as were observed to increase, suggesting a previously unknown mechanism for 
epigenetic regulation. To address this idea, the expression of the BAG family 
genes was used as a model. These genes were used because their expression was 
decreased in DNMT1(-/-), DNMT3B(-/-), and double knockout cells and increased in 
DNMT1-overexpressing and DNMT3B-overexpressing cells. Chromatin 
immunoprecipitation analysis of the BAG-1 promoter in DNMT1-overexpressing or 
DNMT3B-overexpressing cells showed a permissive dimethyl-H3-K4/dimethyl-H3-K9 
chromatin status associated with DNA-binding of CTCFL/BORIS, as well as 
increased BAG-1 expression. In contrast, a nonpermissive 
dimethyl-H3-K4/dimethyl-H3-K9 chromatin status was associated with CTCF 
DNA-binding and decreased BAG-1 expression in the single and double DNMT 
knockout cells. BORIS short hairpin RNA knockdown decreased both promoter 
DNA-binding, as well as BAG-1 expression, and changed the 
dimethyl-H3-K4/dimethyl-H3-K9 ratio to that characteristic of a nonpermissive 
chromatin state. These results suggest that DNMT1 and DNMT3B regulate BAG-1 
expression via insulator protein DNA-binding and chromatin dynamics by 
regulating histone dimethylation.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6654
PMCID: PMC2733164
PMID: 18413740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In a previous genomic analysis, using somatic methyltransferase ( DNMT ) knockout cells, we showed that hypomethylation decreased the expression of as many genes as were observed to increase, suggesting a previously unknown mechanism for epigenetic regulation. To address this idea, the expression of the BAG family genes was used as a model. These genes were used because their expression was decreased in DNMT1 −/− , DNMT3B −/− , and double knockout cells and increased in DNMT1 -overexpressing and DNMT3B -overexpressing cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of the BAG-1 promoter in DNMT1 -overexpressing or DNMT3B -overexpressing cells showed a permissive dimethyl-H3-K4/dimethyl-H3-K9 chromatin status associated with DNA-binding of CTCFL/BORIS, as well as increased BAG-1 expression. In contrast, a nonpermissive dimethyl-H3-K4/dimethyl-H3-K9 chromatin status was associated with CTCF DNA-binding and decreased BAG-1 expression in the single and double DNMT knockout cells. BORIS short hairpin RNA knockdown decreased both promoter DNA-binding, as well as BAG-1 expression, and changed the dimethyl-H3-K4/dimethyl-H3-K9 ratio to that characteristic of a nonpermissive chromatin state. These results suggest that DNMT1 and DNMT3B regulate BAG-1 expression via insulator protein DNA-binding and chromatin dynamics by regulating histone dimethylation.

Introduction

One mechanism regulating the epigenome involves specific chromosomal methylation patterns controlled via a complex interplay of at least three independently encoded DNA methyltransferases ( DNMT ): DNMT1, DNMT3A , and DNMT3B ( 1 , 2 ). It has been shown previously that DNMT1 and DNMT3B seem to cooperatively maintain DNA methylation and gene silencing, and genetic disruption of both significantly inhibited DNMT activity and reduced genomic DNA methylation by roughly 95% ( 3 ). Using these somatic knockout (DNMT1 −/− , DNMT3B −/− ) and double knockout (DKO) cell lines, our group has reported a comprehensive study comparing the effects of altered DNMT activity on gene expression in the cancer epigenome ( 4 ).

One of the most interesting findings in this study involved the observation that a substantial fraction of genes was down-regulated, rather than up-regulated, after genetic DNMT knockout ( 4 ). These results suggest that a hypomethylated chromosomal status inhibits a subset of gene expression, whereas methylation may activate some of these same genes. Since this publication, data from another group ( 5 ) have also shown that overexpression of DNMT1 increased the expression of a specific subset of genes. In this work, genomic analysis of Rat-1 cells overexpressing DNMT1 showed an increased expression of slightly more genes than were observed to decrease, suggesting that regulation of the epigenome may be more complex than previously thought. However, neither of these studies suggests a mechanism to account for these surprising observations.

Chromatin insulators are DNA boundary elements that inhibit gene expression by partitioning chromosomal domains, and they function by blocking the effects of nearby enhancers in a position-dependent manner ( 6 , 7 ). Chromatin insulators binding proteins, such as CTCF and CTCFL/BORIS, bind to specific DNA boundary elements that isolate chromosomal domains from cis -acting transcriptional regions ( 6 , 7 ). CTCF is thought to be a ubiquitous, highly conserved, zinc-finger (ZF) DNA-binding protein that has multiple roles in gene regulation ( 6 ), as well as chromatin and X chromosome inactivation ( 8 ). A paralogue of CTCF , brother of the regulator of imprinted sites ( BORIS ), exhibits extensive homology to CTCF in the 11 ZF regions, suggesting a similar DNA-binding spectrum ( 9 – 11 ). However, there are significant differences in their NH 2 and COOH terminal domains ( 9 ), suggesting that these regions interact with different binding proteins to alter gene expression. BORIS is thought to be primarily a testis-specific protein ( 12 ); however, BORIS has also been shown to be increased in a variety of tumors ( 10 ). CTCF seems to repress gene expression of a specific subset of genes ( 13 , 14 ), whereas BORIS has been shown to activate gene expression ( 10 ).

In the current study, we show that regulation of BAG-1 expression by CTCF and BORIS through CTCF-binding sites located in its upstream promoter region. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis of the BAG-1 upstream regulatory region in DNMT somatic knockout cells showed a nonpermissive chromatin status, indicated by a lower ratio of dimethyl-H3-K4/dimethyl-H3-K9. In addition, we showed preferential CTCF binding to the promoter region, as well as decreased BAG-1 expression in DNMT somatic knockout cells. In contrast, ChIP analysis of the BAG-1 promoter in cell lines overexpressing either DNMT1 or DNMT3B showed a permissive chromatin status, indicated by a higher ratio of dimethyl-H3-K4/dimethyl-H3-K9. Furthermore, preferential BORIS binding to the promoter and increased BAG-1 expression were observed in these cells. BORIS short hairpin RNA (shRNA) knockdown decreased BORIS binding to the BAG-1 promoter, decreased BAG-1 expression, and changed the ratio of dimethyl-H3-K4/dimethyl-H3-K9 to a nonpermissive chromatin state. Finally, transient cotransfection experiments also showed that BORIS activated and CTCF inhibited BAG-1 promoter activity. The results of these experiments suggest that ( a ) cellular DNMT expression seems to influence histone methylation, as reflected by changes in the dimethyl-H3-K4/dimethyl-H3-K9 ratio, ( b ) there is a reciprocity of BORIS and CTCF function to coordinately dictate gene expression via histone methylation, and ( c ) DNA methylation may activate specific genes or gene families via a mechanism involving BORIS binding to the promoter.

Discussion

Epigenetic inheritance involves three primary mechanisms, all of which seem to play a role in carcinogenesis: DNA methylation; posttranslational modification of histones, including methylation, phosphorylation, or acetylation; and modifications by specific DNA-binding proteins, such as insulators binding to boundary elements ( 6 , 7 ). One of the mechanisms that regulate chromatin compaction involves chromatin insulators, which demarcate specific semiautonomous genomic regions into units ( 25 ). The boundaries created by the insulators seem to block or alter the interaction between cis -acting enhancers or silencers in a position-dependent manner ( 26 , 27 ). We have previously shown that genetic inhibition of DNMT down-regulates, as well as up-regulates, an equal number of genes ( 4 ). DNMT1 overexpression also increases the expression of as many genes as are silenced (data not shown), which others have also shown ( 5 ). However, the explanation for this observation is likely complex, and given the intricate nature of the epigenome, this may be due to indirect, as well as direct, effects. To address this, we used the BAG gene family, more specifically BAG-1 , as a model to determine a potential mechanism to explain this gene expression pattern.

The results presented here suggest that BORIS binding to the BAG-1 promoter coincides with changes in the dimethyl-H3-K4/dimethyl-H3-K9 ratio, which indicates a permissive chromatin status for the expression of BAG-1 . This was further suggested by the BORIS shRNA knockdown experiments that showed decreased BORIS binding to the BAG-1 promoter and decreased BAG-1 expression, as well as a nonpermissive chromatin status indicated by the change in the dimethyl-H3-K4/dimethyl-H3-K9 ratio. Furthermore, CTCF binding to the BAG-1 promoter corresponds with a decrease in gene expression, as well as a nonpermissive chromatin status reflected by a decrease in the dimethyl-H3-K4/dimethyl-H3-K9 ratio. A 5′and internal deletion analysis of the BAG-1 promoter clearly showed that the CTCF-binding sites in the BAG-1 CpG island are the target sequences for this regulatory process. As such, these results suggest that insulator proteins, such as BORIS and CTCF, may be critical to the regulation of BAG-1 and very likely to the other BAG genes as well.

These data showed that CTCF binding to the BAG-1 promoter increases as the DNMT gene is deleted. In addition, BORIS binding increases as a function of DNMT overexpression. However, the mechanism underlying these changes as a function of DNMT status is unclear. One possibility is that BORIS and CTCF compete for binding to CTCF-binding sites, and binding is a function of overall intracellular protein levels. However, the protein levels of BORIS and CTCF are roughly equal in both the DNMT somatic knockout and the DNMT -overexpressing cells ( Supplementary Fig. S4 ). While this question, in the context of this manuscript, remains unanswered, it does seem that histone methylation, and likely chromatin remodeling, is associated with the specific insulator protein bound to the BAG-1 promoter.

It has been suggested that hypermethylation, presumably via the activation of DNMT genes, may play a role in carcinogenesis via the silencing of genes, such as p16 and RB ( 28 , 29 ). In this model, the loss of gene function results in a genomic environment that is permissive for cellular damage, such as genomic instability, and this is an early step in carcinogenesis. However, cellular transformation also requires the activation of prosurvival and proproliferative genes. It is well established that in vitro DNMT1 overexpression can induce immortalized cells to transform; however, the mechanisms are complex ( 23 ). The results presented above suggest that two contrasting DNA methylation phenomena may coexist, causing epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor genes, such as p16 and RB , and the activation of oncogenes, such as BAG family genes; both of which may be required for transformation. This idea is being pursued.

This observation is interesting because BAG genes seem to be evolutionarily conserved gene family with homologues found in yeast, amphibians, plants, and mammals. The human genome contains four BAG genes: BAG-1, BAG-3 ( CAIR-1 ), BAG-4 ( SOD ), and BAG-6 ( Scythe, BAT3 ; refs. 30 – 32 ). BAG proteins contain at least one copy of a conserved domain, allowing for an interaction with HSP70 ( 33 , 34 ), and operate as cochaperones that ultimately affect cellular processes, including division, migration, differentiation, and pro-survival pathways ( 35 – 37 ). The BAG family proteins, thus, might be viewed as molecular bridges, with the NH 2 terminal domains serving as scaffolds for interactions with specific proteins and the COOH terminal BAG domain serving as a recruit for HSP70 ( 38 ).

Our data raise an intriguing question: can changes in the regulation of the epigenome silence tumor suppressor genes and simultaneously activate proproliferative/survival pathways, creating a permissive environment for genomic instability and conferring a cell growth advantage? Although BORIS is initially thought to be primarily a testis-specific protein ( 11 ), it is also expressed in a wide variety of tumors ( 9 ), suggesting a potential role in carcinogenesis. Our results suggest that at least one potential mechanism for cellular transformation may involve BORIS-induced activation of a series of preprogrammed prosurvival/proproliferative genes or gene families that favor cell division, creating a permissive environment for division. These results also suggest that DNMT1 and DNMT3B expression seems to influence the reciprocity of BORIS and CTCF function to coordinately dictate gene expression via histone methylation as reflected by changes in the dimethyl-H3-K4/dimethyl-H3-K9 ratio.
