---
pmid: '15620689'
title: Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and actin associate with RNA polymerase
  II and interact with its Rpb7 subunit.
authors:
- Mitsuzawa H
- Kimura M
- Kanda E
- Ishihama A
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2004.11.045
---

# Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and actin associate with RNA polymerase II and interact with its Rpb7 subunit.
**Authors:** Mitsuzawa H, Kimura M, Kanda E, Ishihama A
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2004.11.045](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2004.11.045)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2005 Jan 3;579(1):48-52. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2004.11.045.

Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and actin associate with RNA polymerase 
II and interact with its Rpb7 subunit.

Mitsuzawa H(1), Kimura M, Kanda E, Ishihama A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, 
Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan. hmitsuza@lab.nig.ac.jp

RNA polymerase II (pol II) purified from the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces 
pombe was previously reported to be associated with the general transcription 
factor TFIIF and the C-terminal domain phosphatase Fcp1, as well as 
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), which has recently been 
implicated in transcriptional activation in human cells. Here, we provide 
evidence that the Rpb7 subunit of pol II interacts with GAPDH. Two-hybrid screen 
identified GAPDH as an Rpb7-binding protein. In addition, GAPDH was 
affinity-purified from S. pombe extract by using an Rpb4/Rpb7-coupled column. We 
also identified actin as a pol II-associated protein and revealed the 
interaction between actin and Rpb7.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2004.11.045
PMID: 15620689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
