---
pmid: '16357870'
title: The Polycomb group protein EZH2 directly controls DNA methylation.
authors:
- Viré E
- Brenner C
- Deplus R
- Blanchon L
- Fraga M
- Didelot C
- Morey L
- Van Eynde A
- Bernard D
- Vanderwinden JM
- Bollen M
- Esteller M
- Di Croce L
- de Launoit Y
- Fuks F
journal: Nature
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature04431
---

# The Polycomb group protein EZH2 directly controls DNA methylation.
**Authors:** Viré E, Brenner C, Deplus R, Blanchon L, Fraga M, Didelot C, Morey L, Van Eynde A, Bernard D, Vanderwinden JM, Bollen M, Esteller M, Di Croce L, de Launoit Y, Fuks F
**Journal:** Nature (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature04431](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature04431)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2006 Feb 16;439(7078):871-4. doi: 10.1038/nature04431. Epub 2005 Dec
14.

The Polycomb group protein EZH2 directly controls DNA methylation.

Viré E(1), Brenner C, Deplus R, Blanchon L, Fraga M, Didelot C, Morey L, Van 
Eynde A, Bernard D, Vanderwinden JM, Bollen M, Esteller M, Di Croce L, de 
Launoit Y, Fuks F.

Author information:
(1)Free University of Brussels, Faculty of Medicine, Laboratory of Molecular 
Virology, 808 route de Lennik, 1070 Brussels, Belgium.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2007 Apr 12;446(7137):824.

Comment in
    Nature. 2006 Feb 16;439(7078):794-5. doi: 10.1038/439794a.

The establishment and maintenance of epigenetic gene silencing is fundamental to 
cell determination and function. The essential epigenetic systems involved in 
heritable repression of gene activity are the Polycomb group (PcG) proteins and 
the DNA methylation systems. Here we show that the corresponding silencing 
pathways are mechanistically linked. We find that the PcG protein EZH2 (Enhancer 
of Zeste homolog 2) interacts-within the context of the Polycomb repressive 
complexes 2 and 3 (PRC2/3)-with DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) and associates 
with DNMT activity in vivo. Chromatin immunoprecipitations indicate that binding 
of DNMTs to several EZH2-repressed genes depends on the presence of EZH2. 
Furthermore, we show by bisulphite genomic sequencing that EZH2 is required for 
DNA methylation of EZH2-target promoters. Our results suggest that EZH2 serves 
as a recruitment platform for DNA methyltransferases, thus highlighting a 
previously unrecognized direct connection between two key epigenetic repression 
systems.

DOI: 10.1038/nature04431
PMID: 16357870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
