---
pmid: '15339648'
title: Transmembrane/juxtamembrane domain-dependent Dscam distribution and function
  during mushroom body neuronal morphogenesis.
authors:
- Wang J
- Ma X
- Yang JS
- Zheng X
- Zugates CT
- Lee CH
- Lee T
journal: Neuron
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.06.033
---

# Transmembrane/juxtamembrane domain-dependent Dscam distribution and function during mushroom body neuronal morphogenesis.
**Authors:** Wang J, Ma X, Yang JS, Zheng X, Zugates CT, Lee CH, Lee T
**Journal:** Neuron (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2004.06.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2004.06.033)

## Abstract

1. Neuron. 2004 Sep 2;43(5):663-72. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.06.033.

Transmembrane/juxtamembrane domain-dependent Dscam distribution and function 
during mushroom body neuronal morphogenesis.

Wang J(1), Ma X, Yang JS, Zheng X, Zugates CT, Lee CH, Lee T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Structural Biology, University of Illinois, Urbana 
61801, USA.

Besides 19,008 possible ectodomains, Drosophila Dscam contains two alternative 
transmembrane/juxtamembrane segments, respectively, derived from exon 17.1 and 
exon 17.2. We wondered whether specific Dscam isoforms mediate formation and 
segregation of axonal branches in the Drosophila mushroom bodies (MBs). Removal 
of various subsets of the 12 exon 4s does not affect MB neuronal morphogenesis, 
while expression of a Dscam transgene only partially rescues Dscam mutant 
phenotypes. Interestingly, differential rescuing effects are observed between 
two Dscam transgenes that each possesses one of the two possible exon 17s. Axon 
bifurcation/segregation abnormalities are better rescued by the exon 
17.2-containing transgene, but coexpression of both transgenes is required for 
rescuing mutant viability. Meanwhile, exon 17.1 targets ectopically expressed 
Dscam-GFP to dendrites while Dscam[exon 17.2]-GFP is enriched in axons; only 
Dscam[exon 17.2] affects MB axons. These results suggest that exon 17.1 is 
minimally involved in axonal morphogenesis and that morphogenesis of MB axons 
probably involves multiple distinct exon 17.2-containing Dscam isoforms.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.06.033
PMID: 15339648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
