---
pmid: '18754681'
title: CXXC domain of human DNMT1 is essential for enzymatic activity.
authors:
- Pradhan M
- Estève PO
- Chin HG
- Samaranayke M
- Kim GD
- Pradhan S
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi8011725
---

# CXXC domain of human DNMT1 is essential for enzymatic activity.
**Authors:** Pradhan M, Estève PO, Chin HG, Samaranayke M, Kim GD, Pradhan S
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi8011725](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi8011725)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2008 Sep 23;47(38):10000-9. doi: 10.1021/bi8011725. Epub 2008
Aug  29.

CXXC domain of human DNMT1 is essential for enzymatic activity.

Pradhan M(1), Estève PO, Chin HG, Samaranayke M, Kim GD, Pradhan S.

Author information:
(1)New England Biolabs, 240 County Road, Ipswich, Massachusetts 01938-2723, USA. 
pradhan@neb.com

DNA cytosine methylation is one of the major epigenetic gene silencing marks in 
the human genome facilitated by DNA methyltransferases. DNA cytosine-5 
methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) performs maintenance methylation in somatic cells. 
In cancer cells, DNMT1 is responsible for the aberrant hypermethylation of CpG 
islands and the silencing of tumor suppressor genes. Here we show that the 
catalytically active recombinant DNMT1, lacking 580 amino acids from the amino 
terminus, binds to unmethylated DNA with higher affinity than hemimethylated or 
methylated DNA. To further understand the binding domain of enzyme, we have used 
gel shift assay. We have demonstrated that the CXXC region (C is cysteine; X is 
any amino acid) of DNMT1 bound specifically to unmethylated CpG dinucleotides. 
Furthermore, mutation of the conserved cysteines abolished CXXC mediated DNA 
binding. In transfected COS-7 cells, CXXC deleted DNMT1 (DNMT1 (DeltaCXXC)) 
localized on replication foci. Both point mutant and DNMT1 (DeltaCXXC) enzyme 
displayed significant reduction in catalytic activity, confirming that this 
domain is crucial for enzymatic activity. A permanent cell line with DNMT1 
(DeltaCXXC) displayed partial loss of genomic methylation on rDNA loci, despite 
the presence of endogenous wild-type enzyme. Thus, the CXXC domain encompassing 
the amino terminus region of DNMT1 cooperates with the catalytic domain for DNA 
methyltransferase activity.

DOI: 10.1021/bi8011725
PMID: 18754681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
