---
pmid: '8930895'
title: Interaction between yeast Cdc6 protein and B-type cyclin/Cdc28 kinases.
authors:
- Elsasser S
- Lou F
- Wang B
- Campbell JL
- Jong A
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC276021
doi: 10.1091/mbc.7.11.1723
---

# Interaction between yeast Cdc6 protein and B-type cyclin/Cdc28 kinases.
**Authors:** Elsasser S, Lou F, Wang B, Campbell JL, Jong A
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.7.11.1723](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.7.11.1723)
**PMC:** [PMC276021](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC276021/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 1996 Nov;7(11):1723-35. doi: 10.1091/mbc.7.11.1723.

Interaction between yeast Cdc6 protein and B-type cyclin/Cdc28 kinases.

Elsasser S(1), Lou F, Wang B, Campbell JL, Jong A.

Author information:
(1)Braun Laboratories, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena 91125, USA.

During purification of recombinant Cdc6 expressed in yeast, we found that Cdc6 
interacts with the critical cell cycle, cyclin-dependent protein kinase Cdc28. 
Cdc6 and Cdc28 can be coimmunoprecipitated from extracts, Cdc6 is retained on 
the Cdc28-binding matrix p13-agarose, and Cdc28 is retained on an affinity 
column charged with bacterially produced Cdc6. Cdc6, which is a phosphoprotein 
in vivo, contains five Cdc28 consensus sites and is a substrate of the Cdc28 
kinase in vitro. Cdc6 also inhibits Cdc28 histone H1 kinase activity. 
Strikingly, Cdc6 interacts preferentially with B-type cyclin/Cdc28 complexes and 
not Cln/Cdc28 in log-phase cells. However, Cdc6 does not associate with Cdc28 
when cells are blocked at the restrictive temperature in a cdc34 mutant, a point 
in the cell cycle when the B-type cyclin/Cdc28 inhibitor p40Sic1 accumulates and 
purified p40Sic1 inhibits the Cdc6/Cdc28 interaction. Deletion of the Cdc28 
interaction domain from Cdc6 yields a protein that cannot support growth. 
However, when overproduced, the mutant protein can support growth. Furthermore, 
whereas overproduction of wild-type Cdc6 leads to growth inhibition and bud 
hyperpolarization, overproduction of the mutant protein supports growth at 
normal rates with normal morphology. Thus, the interaction may have a role in 
the essential function of Cdc6 in initiation and in restraining mitosis until 
replication is complete.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.7.11.1723
PMCID: PMC276021
PMID: 8930895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

During purification of recombinant Cdc6 expressed in yeast, we found that Cdc6 interacts with the critical cell cycle, cyclin-dependent protein kinase Cdc28. Cdc6 and Cdc28 can be coimmunoprecipitated from extracts, Cdc6 is retained on the Cdc28-binding matrix p13-agarose, and Cdc28 is retained on an affinity column charged with bacterially produced Cdc6. Cdc6, which is a phosphoprotein in vivo, contains five Cdc28 consensus sites and is a substrate of the Cdc28 kinase in vitro. Cdc6 also inhibits Cdc28 histone H1 kinase activity. Strikingly, Cdc6 interacts preferentially with B-type cyclin/Cdc28 complexes and not Cln/Cdc28 in log-phase cells. However, Cdc6 does not associate with Cdc28 when cells are blocked at the restrictive temperature in a cdc34 mutant, a point in the cell cycle when the B-type cyclin/Cdc28 inhibitor p40Sic1 accumulates and purified p40Sic1 inhibits the Cdc6/Cdc28 interaction. Deletion of the Cdc28 interaction domain from Cdc6 yields a protein that cannot support growth. However, when overproduced, the mutant protein can support growth. Furthermore, whereas overproduction of wild-type Cdc6 leads to growth inhibition and bud hyperpolarization, overproduction of the mutant protein supports growth at normal rates with normal morphology. Thus, the interaction may have a role in the essential function of Cdc6 in initiation and in restraining mitosis until replication is complete.
