---
pmid: '16452482'
title: ATM activation by ionizing radiation requires BRCA1-associated BAAT1.
authors:
- Aglipay JA
- Martin SA
- Tawara H
- Lee SW
- Ouchi T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M510332200
---

# ATM activation by ionizing radiation requires BRCA1-associated BAAT1.
**Authors:** Aglipay JA, Martin SA, Tawara H, Lee SW, Ouchi T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M510332200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M510332200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 7;281(14):9710-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M510332200. Epub 2006
 Feb 1.

ATM activation by ionizing radiation requires BRCA1-associated BAAT1.

Aglipay JA(1), Martin SA, Tawara H, Lee SW, Ouchi T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York 
University, New York, New York 10029, USA.

ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) is required for the early response to 
DNA-damaging agents such as ionizing radiation (IR) that induce DNA 
double-strand breaks. Cells deficient in ATM are extremely sensitive to IR. It 
has been shown that IR induces immediate phosphorylation of ATM at Ser(1981), 
leading to catalytic activation of the protein. We recently isolated a novel 
BRCA1-associated protein, BAAT1 (BRCA1-associated protein required for ATM 
activation-1), by yeast two-hybrid screening and found that BAAT1 also binds to 
ATM, localizes to double-strand breaks, and is required for Ser(1981) 
phosphorylation of ATM. Small interfering RNA-mediated stable or transient 
reduction of BAAT1 resulted in decreased phosphorylation of both ATM at 
Ser(1981) and CHK2 at Thr(68). Treatment of BAAT1-depleted cells with okadaic 
acid greatly restored phosphorylation of ATM at Ser(1981), suggesting that BAAT1 
is involved in the regulation of ATM phosphatase. Protein phosphatase 
2A-mediated dephosphorylation of ATM was partially blocked by purified BAAT1 in 
vitro. Significantly, acute loss of BAAT1 resulted in increased p53, leading to 
apoptosis. These results demonstrate that DNA damage-induced ATM activation 
requires a coordinated assembly of BRCA1, BAAT1, and ATM.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M510332200
PMID: 16452482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
