---
pmid: '16786169'
title: Regucalcin increases Ca2+-ATPase activity in the heart mitochondria of normal
  and regucalcin transgenic rats.
authors:
- Akhter T
- Sawada N
- Yamaguchi M
journal: Int J Mol Med
year: '2006'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC11113322
---

# Regucalcin increases Ca2+-ATPase activity in the heart mitochondria of normal and regucalcin transgenic rats.
**Authors:** Akhter T, Sawada N, Yamaguchi M
**Journal:** Int J Mol Med (2006)
**PMC:** [PMC11113322](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11113322/)

## Abstract

1. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Jul;18(1):171-6.

Regucalcin increases Ca2+-ATPase activity in the heart mitochondria of normal 
and regucalcin transgenic rats.

Akhter T(1), Sawada N, Yamaguchi M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology and Molecular Metabolism, Graduate School of 
Nutritional Sciences, University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan.

The role of regucalcin, a regulatory protein in intracellular signaling system, 
in the regulation of Ca2+-ATPase activity in rat heart mitochondria was 
investigated. Mitochondrial Ca2+-ATPase activity was significantly increased by 
increasing concentrations of CaCl2 (2.5-50 microM). An increase in the enzyme 
activity was saturated at 50 microM CaCl2. The addition of regucalcin 
(10(-11)-10(-8) M) in the enzyme reaction mixture caused a significant increase 
in Ca2+-ATPase activity in heart mitochondria in the presence of 50 microM 
CaCl2. Regucalcin did not have a significant effect on mitochondrial Mg2+-ATPase 
activity. Regucalcin (10(-9) M) did not have a significant effect on Ca2+-ATPase 
activity in the presence of digitonin (10(-3) or 10(-2) %), which is a 
solubilization effect on membranous lipids. The effect of regucalcin in 
increasing mitochondrial Ca2+-ATPase activity was not observed in the presence 
of ruthenium red (10(-7) M) or lanthanum chloride (10(-7) M), which is an 
inhibitor of Ca2+ uniporter. The effect of regucalcin (10(-9) M) in increasing 
mitochondrial Ca2+-ATPase activity was not significantly enhanced in the 
presence of calmodulin (5 microg/ml) or dibutyryl cyclic AMP (10(-4) M), which 
is an intracellular signaling factor that can cause a significant increase in 
the enzyme activity. Mitochondrial regucalcin localization was significantly 
increased in the heart of regucalcin transgenic rats as compared with that of 
normal rats using Western blot analysis. Ca2+-ATPase activity was significantly 
increased in the heart mitochondria of regucalcin transgenic rats. This study 
demonstrates that regucalcin has an activating effect on Ca2+-ATPase in rat 
heart mitochondria, suggesting its role in the regulation of heart mitochondrial 
function.

PMID: 16786169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Regucalcin (RGN) is a calcium (Ca 2+ )-binding protein widely expressed in vertebrate and invertebrate species, which is also known as senescence marker protein 30, due to its molecular weight (33 kDa) and a characteristically diminished expression with the aging process. RGN regulates intracellular Ca 2+ homeostasis and the activity of several proteins involved in intracellular signalling pathways, namely, kinases, phosphatases, phosphodiesterase, nitric oxide synthase and proteases, which highlights its importance in cell biology. In addition, RGN has cytoprotective effects reducing intracellular levels of oxidative stress, also playing a role in the control of cell survival and apoptosis. Multiple factors have been identified regulating the cell levels of RGN transcripts and protein, and an altered expression pattern of this interesting protein has been found in cases of reproductive disorders, neurodegenerative diseases and cancer. Moreover, RGN is a serum-secreted protein, and its levels have been correlated with the stage of disease, which strongly suggests the usefulness of this protein as a potential biomarker for monitoring disease onset and progression. The present review aims to discuss the available information concerning RGN expression and function in distinct cell types and tissues, integrating cellular and molecular mechanisms in the context of normal and pathological conditions. Insight into the cellular actions of RGN will be a key step towards deepening the knowledge of the biology of several human diseases.

Introduction

Regucalcin (RGN) was initially discovered in 1978 by Yamaguchi [ 1 ] and, although classified as a calcium (Ca 2+ )-binding protein, it does not contain the typical EF-hand Ca 2+ -binding motif [ 2 ]. The overall structure of RGN protein contains 24 β-strands forming 6 β-sheets able to bind diverse divalent cations (Ca 2+ , Mg 2+ , Mn 2+ and Zn 2+ ) [ 3 – 6 ]. The RGN ability to bind Ca 2+ was recently confirmed by X-ray diffraction studies which have allowed the resolving of the crystal structure of human RGN protein bound to Ca 2+ or Zn 2+ cations. Although Ca 2+ and Zn 2+ ions bind to the same amino acid residues forming a unique metal binding site in a nearly identical coordination, an very much higher level of dissociation constant is documented for Ca 2+ which could be relevant under non-physiological conditions, whereas elevated Ca 2+ levels can occur [ 4 ].

The RGN gene is localised in the p11.3-q11.2 and q11.1-12 segments of the human and rat X chromosome, respectively [ 7 , 8 ]. In both cases, the gene consists of seven exons [ 9 – 11 ] encoding a protein of 299 amino acid residues with an approximate molecular weight of 33 kDa [ 2 , 12 ]. For this reason, together with the diminished expression of RGN in tissues of aged animals, Fujita and co-authors [ 12 – 14 ] named it senescence marker protein 30 (SMP30).

RGN is highly expressed in the liver and kidney cortex [ 12 , 15 , 16 ], but it has been detected in several other tissues [ 16 , 17 ] in a broad range of vertebrate and invertebrate species [ 18 – 20 ]. The transcription of RGN gene is enhanced by several regulatory transcription factors upstream of the 5′ flaking region, namely the AP1, NF1-A1, RGPR-p117 and β-catenin [ 21 ]. Ca 2+ levels modulate RGN expression in a process involving, for example, calmodulin (CaM) or protein kinase C (PKC) [ 22 – 24 ]. Also, Ca 2+ -independent mechanisms [ 25 ], hormonal factors and others have been described as regulating the levels of RGN in cells [ 11 , 26 – 30 ]. Moreover, altered expression patterns of RGN have been associated with several disease conditions in both human and animal models [ 11 , 31 – 39 ], which highlights the importance of this protein in cell biology.

RGN has been localised to the cell nucleus and cytoplasm [ 26 , 40 , 41 ], as well as in the mitochondrial fraction [ 42 ], and multiple physiological functions have been assigned to this curious protein. Among them is the ability of RGN to influence Ca 2+ homeostasis through the regulation of Ca 2+ -pumping activity in the cell membrane, nucleus, microsomes, endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria of various cell types [ 43 ]. It has also been associated with intracellular signalling pathways, since it regulates several Ca 2+ -dependent enzymes such as protein kinases, tyrosine kinases, phosphatases, phosphodiesterase, nitric oxide synthase and proteases [ 43 – 48 ].

In addition, the antioxidant properties of RGN in reducing intracellular levels of oxidative stress have also been described. This effect is achieved through modulation of the activity of enzymes involved in generation of oxidative stress as well as in the antioxidant defence [ 49 – 52 ].

Several reports using gene-silencing and over-expression approaches have pointed out a role of RGN in regulating cell death and proliferation. Although the mechanisms implicated in this control are not completely understood, it has been demonstrated that RGN can regulate DNA synthesis and fragmentation [ 53 – 56 ], and modulate the expression of oncogenes, tumour suppressor genes and cell cycle regulators [ 53 , 54 , 57 ], influencing survival and apoptotic pathways [ 58 – 60 ].

This review discusses the current knowledge about the expression and function of RGN in several cell types and tissues, exploring concepts from the molecular biology point of view in signalling pathways and systems biology. The potential roles of RGN in pathological situations will also be discussed.
