---
pmid: '12242293'
title: Interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor-associated kinase-dependent IL-1-induced signaling
  complexes phosphorylate TAK1 and TAB2 at the plasma membrane and activate TAK1 in
  the cytosol.
authors:
- Jiang Z
- Ninomiya-Tsuji J
- Qian Y
- Matsumoto K
- Li X
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC139807
doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.20.7158-7167.2002
---

# Interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor-associated kinase-dependent IL-1-induced signaling complexes phosphorylate TAK1 and TAB2 at the plasma membrane and activate TAK1 in the cytosol.
**Authors:** Jiang Z, Ninomiya-Tsuji J, Qian Y, Matsumoto K, Li X
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.22.20.7158-7167.2002](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.22.20.7158-7167.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC139807](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC139807/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Oct;22(20):7158-67. doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.20.7158-7167.2002.

Interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor-associated kinase-dependent IL-1-induced signaling 
complexes phosphorylate TAK1 and TAB2 at the plasma membrane and activate TAK1 
in the cytosol.

Jiang Z(1), Ninomiya-Tsuji J, Qian Y, Matsumoto K, Li X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic 
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

Interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor-associated kinase (IRAK) plays an important role 
in the sequential formation and activation of IL-1-induced signaling complexes. 
Previous studies showed that IRAK is recruited to the IL-1-receptor complex, 
where it is hyperphosphorylated. We now find that the phosphorylated IRAK in 
turn recruits TRAF6 to the receptor complex (complex I), which differs from the 
previous concept that IRAK interacts with TRAF6 after it leaves the receptor. 
IRAK then brings TRAF6 to TAK1, TAB1, and TAB2, which are preassociated on the 
membrane before stimulation to form the membrane-associated complex II. The 
formation of complex II leads to the phosphorylation of TAK1 and TAB2 on the 
membrane by an unknown kinase, followed by the dissociation of 
TRAF6-TAK1-TAB1-TAB2 (complex III) from IRAK and consequent translocation of 
complex III to the cytosol. The formation of complex III and its interaction 
with additional cytosolic factors lead to the activation of TAK1, resulting in 
NF-kappaB and JNK activation. Phosphorylated IRAK remains on the membrane and 
eventually is ubiquitinated and degraded. Taken together, the new data reveal 
that IRAK plays a critical role in mediating the association and dissociation of 
IL-1-induced signaling complexes, functioning as an organizer and transporter in 
IL-1-dependent signaling.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.22.20.7158-7167.2002
PMCID: PMC139807
PMID: 12242293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor-associated kinase (IRAK) plays an important role in the sequential formation and activation of IL-1-induced signaling complexes. Previous studies showed that IRAK is recruited to the IL-1-receptor complex, where it is hyperphosphorylated. We now find that the phosphorylated IRAK in turn recruits TRAF6 to the receptor complex (complex I), which differs from the previous concept that IRAK interacts with TRAF6 after it leaves the receptor. IRAK then brings TRAF6 to TAK1, TAB1, and TAB2, which are preassociated on the membrane before stimulation to form the membrane-associated complex II. The formation of complex II leads to the phosphorylation of TAK1 and TAB2 on the membrane by an unknown kinase, followed by the dissociation of TRAF6-TAK1-TAB1-TAB2 (complex III) from IRAK and consequent translocation of complex III to the cytosol. The formation of complex III and its interaction with additional cytosolic factors lead to the activation of TAK1, resulting in NF-κB and JNK activation. Phosphorylated IRAK remains on the membrane and eventually is ubiquitinated and degraded. Taken together, the new data reveal that IRAK plays a critical role in mediating the association and dissociation of IL-1-induced signaling complexes, functioning as an organizer and transporter in IL-1-dependent signaling.

DISCUSSION

On the basis of the results presented above, we propose a revised model for IL-1-dependent signaling (Fig. 1 ). Upon IL-1 stimulation, the adaptor molecules MyD88 and Tollip are recruited to the IL-1 receptor complex, which then recruits IRAK. IRAK is hyperphosphorylated, mediating the recruitment of TRAF6 to the receptor complex (complex I). Since IRAK4 has recently been shown to be an essential component for the IL-1 signaling pathway and proposed to function as an IRAK kinase ( 11 , 24 ), we have also included IRAK4 in the complex I. IRAK-TRAF6 then leaves complex I to interact with preassociated TAK1, TAB1, and TAB2 on the membrane, resulting in the formation of complex II. The formation of complex II leads to the phosphorylation of TAK1 and TAB2, which facilitates the formation and translocation of complex III from the membrane to the cytosol. The formation of complex III and its interaction with additional factors in the cytosol lead to the activation of TAK1. The activated TAK1 causes, directly or indirectly, the activation of IKK and MKK6, resulting in activation of NF-κB and JNK.

IRAK is necessary for activation of both IL-1-induced NF-κB and JNK, but the kinase activity of IRAK is not required for either, suggesting that IRAK functions through protein-protein interactions. We have now shown that IRAK plays a critical role in the formation of IL-1-induced signaling complexes (complex I). IRAK is not only required for the recruitment of TRAF6 to the receptor to form complex I but also is responsible for bringing TRAF6 to the preassociated TAK1, TAB1, and TAB2 to form complex II on the membrane. We have previously shown that IRAK is required for the translocation of TRAF6 and TAB2 from the membrane to the cytosol. Therefore, IRAK also plays a critical role in mediating the formation and translocation of complex III. The phosphorylated IRAK itself remains on the membrane and eventually is degraded. We propose that IRAK functions as an organizer and transporter in IL-1 signaling pathway, mediating the sequential association and dissociation of different signaling components and leading to the activation of NF-κB and JNK.

In a earlier study ( 21 ), we reported that TAK1 and TAB1 were localized primarily in the cytosol with or without stimulation and that only small fractions of TAK1 and TAB1 were detected in the membrane. Therefore, we proposed that IRAK forms a complex with TRAF6 and TAB2 on the membrane upon IL-1 stimulation, followed by the translocation of TRAF6 and TAB2 to the cytosol to interact with the cytosolic TAK1 and TAB1. Our recent observation that TAK1-TAB1-TAB2 are preassociated in a coimmunoprecipitation experiment with whole-cell extract prepared with Triton-containing lysis buffer (Fig. 5A ) prompted us to rethink this model. Since TAB2 is localized exclusively on the membrane, we realized that the small amounts of TAK1 and TAB1 detected in the membrane are probably very important. Therefore, we studied the subcellular localization of TAK1, TAB1, and TAB2 more carefully. Through error and trial, we learned that thorough homogenization is very critical to fractionating TAK1 and TAB1 into the P100 membrane fraction. Otherwise we lose large amounts of membrane fraction to the cell debris by the first step, low-speed centrifugation. By modifying our fractionation protocol, it became much easier to detect TAK1 and TAB1 in the P100 membrane fraction (Materials and Methods). It was then very clear that there are two pools of TAK1 and TAB1 in the cells. While the majority is in the cytosol, some TAK1 and TAB1 are preassociated with TAB2 on the membrane. Indeed, we detected the preassociated complex of TAK1-TAB1-TAB2 in the P100 membrane fraction with or without stimulation (Fig. 5B ). Furthermore, we have shown that the preassociated TAK1-TAB1-TAB2 forms a complex with IRAK-TRAF6 on the membrane in response to IL-1 stimulation (complex II) (Fig. 6 ). Moreover, while TAK1 is activated in the cytosol, the IL-1-induced phosphorylation of TAK1 occurs on the membrane (Fig. 7 ). Taken together, these results yielded the following model. IRAK-TRAF6 complex is first formed on the receptor (complex I) and then is released from the receptor to interact with the preassociated complex TAK1-TAB1-TAB2 on the membrane (complex II), where TAK1 is phosphorylated. TRAF6-TAK1-TAB1-TAB2 then dissociates from IRAK and translocates to the cytosol (complex III), where the kinase activity of TAK1 is activated (Fig. 7 and 8 ). In addition to its role in IL-1-mediated signaling, TAK1 has also been shown to play a role in Toll-like receptor 2, transforming growth factor β receptor, tumor necrosis factor receptor, and RANK-mediated signaling pathways. Since TAK1 seems to function as an upstream kinase of IKK and MKK6, it is probably involved in many other NF-κB-dependent signaling pathways as well. Therefore, it is plausible that the two pools of TAK1 in the cells may participate in different signaling pathways through the interaction of TAK1 with many other signaling components.

It is important to note that in addition to TAK1, several other MAP3 kinases have also been implicated in activating IKK, including MEKK1, MEKK2, MEKK3, and NIK. However, none of these kinases have been definitively proven to be an IKK kinase in vivo. MEKK1-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) display normal NF-κB activation in response to stimulation ( 34 ). Interestingly, although NIK-null cells also display normal NF-κB DNA-binding activity in response to many stimuli ( 33 ), they exhibit weak activation of NF-κB-dependent genes specifically in response to lymphotoxin-β receptor (LTβR) signaling. Recently, it has been shown that NIK and IKKα kinase are required specifically for signal-dependent p100 processing, which helps to explain the phenotype of NIK-null cells ( 16 , 30 ). Curiously, MEKK3, which can phosphorylate IKKβ in vitro, is required for tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced NF-κB activation. MEKK3-null MEFs exhibit a greatly decreased level of IKK activation, IκB degradation, and NF-κB activation in response to tumor necrosis factor alpha ( 32 ). Taken together, these findings suggest that there might be more than one IKK kinase.

While TAK1 and TAB2 are phosphorylated on the membrane in response to IL-1 stimulation, the kinase activity of TAK1 is activated only in the cytosol. These results indicate that the phosphorylation of TAK1 on the membrane is probably not due to autophosphorylation. The fact that TAK1 and TAB2 are also phosphorylated in IRAK-deficient cells that express a kinase-dead IRAK mutant indicates that IRAK cannot be the kinase that phosphorylates TAK1. Taken together, these results suggest that another membrane-bound kinase must be responsible for the IL-1-induced phosphorylation of TAK1 and TAB2.

The detailed molecular mechanism for the formation and translocation of complex III is still not clear. Since TAK1 and TAB2 are phosphorylated in complex II on the membrane, it is possible that the phosphorylation of these two proteins results in conformational changes in complex II, which leads to the dissociation of complex III from IRAK, followed by its translocation to the cytosol. The fact that TAK1 is activated only in the cytosol strongly suggests that its activation occurs in complex III, although it is unclear how this is accomplished. Our results from the in vitro TAK1 activation experiments suggest that the activation of TAK1 may involve the interaction of complex III with additional cytosolic factors. This conclusion is supported by previous studies reported by Deng et al. ( 6 ) and Wang et al. ( 27 ) working in the laboratory of Z. J. Chen. Using an in vitro system to study TRAF6-mediated TAK1 and IKK activation, they showed that TRAF6-mediated TAK1 and IKK activation requires nonclassical ubiquitination catalyzed by the ubiquitination proteins Ubc13 and Uev1A, which play a regulatory role and do not lead to proteasome-mediated degradation. TRAF6, together with Ubc13 and Uev1A, functions as part of a unique E3 complex and is itself the target of ubiquitination. The TAK1-TAB1-TAB complex is activated by association with ubiquitinated TRAF6. Once activated, TAK1 can directly phosphorylate IKK and MKK6, leading to the activation of both the JNK and NF-κB signaling pathways. On the basis of the above information, we propose that complex III may interact with Ubc13 and Uev1A when it is translocated to the cytosol, which triggers the ubiquitination of TRAF6, leading to the activation of TAK1 and IKK. Alternatively, complex III may interact with some unknown components in the cytosol to cause TAK1 activation. These hypotheses will be tested in our in vitro activation system.
