---
pmid: '23524951'
title: mTOR inhibits autophagy by controlling ULK1 ubiquitylation, self-association
  and function through AMBRA1 and TRAF6.
authors:
- Nazio F
- Strappazzon F
- Antonioli M
- Bielli P
- Cianfanelli V
- Bordi M
- Gretzmeier C
- Dengjel J
- Piacentini M
- Fimia GM
- Cecconi F
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ncb2708
---

# mTOR inhibits autophagy by controlling ULK1 ubiquitylation, self-association and function through AMBRA1 and TRAF6.
**Authors:** Nazio F, Strappazzon F, Antonioli M, Bielli P, Cianfanelli V, Bordi M, Gretzmeier C, Dengjel J, Piacentini M, Fimia GM, Cecconi F
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb2708](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb2708)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Apr;15(4):406-16. doi: 10.1038/ncb2708. Epub 2013 Mar 24.

mTOR inhibits autophagy by controlling ULK1 ubiquitylation, self-association and 
function through AMBRA1 and TRAF6.

Nazio F(1), Strappazzon F, Antonioli M, Bielli P, Cianfanelli V, Bordi M, 
Gretzmeier C, Dengjel J, Piacentini M, Fimia GM, Cecconi F.

Author information:
(1)Dulbecco Telethon Institute at the Department of Biology, University of Rome 
'Tor Vergata', 00133 Rome, Italy.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Aug 15;12(16):2524-5. doi: 10.4161/cc.25835.

Autophagy is important in the basal or stress-induced clearance of bulk cytosol, 
damaged organelles, pathogens and selected proteins by specific vesicles, the 
autophagosomes. Following mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) inhibition, 
autophagosome formation is primed by the ULK1 and the beclin-1-Vps34-AMBRA1 
complexes, which are linked together by a scaffold platform, the exocyst. 
Although several regulative steps have been described along this pathway, few 
targets of mTOR are known, and the cross-talk between ULK1 and beclin 1 
complexes is still not fully understood. We show that under non-autophagic 
conditions, mTOR inhibits AMBRA1 by phosphorylation, whereas on autophagy 
induction, AMBRA1 is dephosphorylated. In this condition, AMBRA1, interacting 
with the E3-ligase TRAF6, supports ULK1 ubiquitylation by LYS-63-linked chains, 
and its subsequent stabilization, self-association and function. As ULK1 has 
been shown to activate AMBRA1 by phosphorylation, the proposed pathway may act 
as a positive regulation loop, which may be targeted in human disorders linked 
to impaired autophagy.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb2708
PMID: 23524951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
