---
pmid: '20351172'
title: The UBXN1 protein associates with autoubiquitinated forms of the BRCA1 tumor
  suppressor and inhibits its enzymatic function.
authors:
- Wu-Baer F
- Ludwig T
- Baer R
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC2876507
doi: 10.1128/MCB.01056-09
---

# The UBXN1 protein associates with autoubiquitinated forms of the BRCA1 tumor suppressor and inhibits its enzymatic function.
**Authors:** Wu-Baer F, Ludwig T, Baer R
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.01056-09](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.01056-09)
**PMC:** [PMC2876507](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2876507/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Jun;30(11):2787-98. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01056-09. Epub 2010
Mar  29.

The UBXN1 protein associates with autoubiquitinated forms of the BRCA1 tumor 
suppressor and inhibits its enzymatic function.

Wu-Baer F(1), Ludwig T, Baer R.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University Medical Center, Irving 
Cancer Research Center, Rm. 503A, 1130 St. Nicholas Avenue, New York, NY 10032, 
USA.

Although the BRCA1 tumor suppressor has been implicated in many cellular 
processes, the biochemical mechanisms by which it influences these diverse 
pathways are poorly understood. The only known enzymatic function of BRCA1 is 
the E3 ubiquitin ligase activity mediated by its highly conserved RING domain. 
In vivo, BRCA1 associates with the BARD1 polypeptide to form a heterodimeric 
BRCA1/BARD1 complex that catalyzes autoubiquitination of BRCA1 and trans 
ubiquitination of other protein substrates. In most cases, BRCA1-dependent 
ubiquitination generates polyubiquitin chains bearing an unconventional K6 
linkage that does not appear to target proteins for proteasomal degradation. 
Since ubiquitin-dependent processes are usually mediated by cellular receptors 
with ubiquitin-binding motifs, we screened for proteins that specifically bind 
autoubiquitinated BRCA1. Here we report that the UBXN1 polypeptide, which 
contains a ubiquitin-associated (UBA) motif, recognizes autoubiquitinated BRCA1. 
This occurs through a bipartite interaction in which the UBA domain of UBXN1 
binds K6-linked polyubiquitin chains conjugated to BRCA1 while the C-terminal 
sequences of UBXN1 bind the BRCA1/BARD1 heterodimer in a ubiquitin-independent 
fashion. Significantly, the E3 ligase activity of BRCA1/BARD1 is dramatically 
reduced in the presence of UBXN1, suggesting that UBXN1 regulates the enzymatic 
function of BRCA1 in a manner that is dependent on its ubiquitination status.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.01056-09
PMCID: PMC2876507
PMID: 20351172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Although the BRCA1 tumor suppressor has been implicated in many cellular processes, the biochemical mechanisms by which it influences these diverse pathways are poorly understood. The only known enzymatic function of BRCA1 is the E3 ubiquitin ligase activity mediated by its highly conserved RING domain. In vivo , BRCA1 associates with the BARD1 polypeptide to form a heterodimeric BRCA1/BARD1 complex that catalyzes autoubiquitination of BRCA1 and trans ubiquitination of other protein substrates. In most cases, BRCA1-dependent ubiquitination generates polyubiquitin chains bearing an unconventional K6 linkage that does not appear to target proteins for proteasomal degradation. Since ubiquitin-dependent processes are usually mediated by cellular receptors with ubiquitin-binding motifs, we screened for proteins that specifically bind autoubiquitinated BRCA1. Here we report that the UBXN1 polypeptide, which contains a ubiquitin-associated (UBA) motif, recognizes autoubiquitinated BRCA1. This occurs through a bipartite interaction in which the UBA domain of UBXN1 binds K6-linked polyubiquitin chains conjugated to BRCA1 while the C-terminal sequences of UBXN1 bind the BRCA1/BARD1 heterodimer in a ubiquitin-independent fashion. Significantly, the E3 ligase activity of BRCA1/BARD1 is dramatically reduced in the presence of UBXN1, suggesting that UBXN1 regulates the enzymatic function of BRCA1 in a manner that is dependent on its ubiquitination status.

DISCUSSION

As the only known enzymatic property of BRCA1, the E3 ligase activity is likely to mediate at least some of the many cellular functions now attributed to BRCA1. Although the BRCA1/BARD1 heterodimer can catalyze both BRCA1 autoubiquitination and trans -ubiquitination of other proposed substrates, the functional consequences of BRCA1-mediated ubiquitination remain unclear ( 1 , 51 ). In vitro , BRCA1/BARD1 can generate different forms of polyubiquitin, depending on the identity of the collaborating E2 conjugating enzyme. For example, in the presence of the UbcH5 conjugases (UbcH5a, UbcH5b, and UbcH5c), BRCA1/BARD1 primarily synthesizes chains bearing the unconventional K6 linkage ( 35 , 53 ). However, with certain combinations of other E2 enzymes, BRCA1/BARD1 can catalyze formation of either K48- or K63-linked polyubiquitin ( 7 ). To date, the only substrates shown to be ubiquitinated in a BRCA1-dependent manner in vivo are those conjugated to K6-linked chains, including NPM/B23, CtIP, RPB8, and BRCA1 itself ( 35 , 43 , 52 , 53 , 55 ). Interestingly, multiple lines of evidence suggest that proteins bearing K6-linked chains are not targeted for proteasomal degradation. First, although control polypeptides conjugated with K48-linked polyubiquitin are readily degraded upon in vitro incubation with purified 26S proteasomes, this treatment results in deubiquitination, but not degradation, of BRCA1 polypeptides autoubiquitinated with K6-linked chains ( 35 ). Second, while BRCA1/BARD1 readily catalyzes autoubiquitination of the BRCA1 subunit ( 4 ), leading to its conjugation with K6-linked chains both in vivo and in vitro ( 35 , 53 ), autoubiquitination is unlikely to increase BRCA1 turnover since BRCA1 and BARD1 are known to stabilize each other upon coexpression in mammalian cells ( 16 , 22 , 30 ). Third, the stabilities of the four proteins known to be conjugated to K6-linked polyubiquitin in vivo in a BRCA1-dependent manner (NPM, CtIP, RPB8, and BRCA1) are not reduced upon coexpression of BRCA1/BARD1, further suggesting that K6-linked chains do not promote proteasomal degradation ( 35 , 43 , 52 , 53 , 55 ). As such, the functional consequences of BRCA1-mediated ubiquitination with K6-linked chains remain unclear.

Ubiquitin-dependent processes are ultimately mediated by cellular receptors that harbor ubiquitin-binding domains ( 15 , 17 , 18 ). Although a variety of different ubiquitin-binding motifs have been identified to date, the UBA motif is among the most common. At least 37 distinct human proteins harbor a UBA domain, including the RAD23A and RAD23B polypeptides that promote proteasomal degradation of K48-polyubiquitinated proteins. Our data indicate that UBXN1 associates with autoubiquitinated BRCA1/BARD1 heterodimers in a bipartite manner such that its UBA domain binds the conjugated K6-linked chains of BRCA1 while its C-terminal sequences interact with BRCA1/BARD1 in a ubiquitin-independent fashion. Interestingly, cellular receptors for polyubiquitinated proteins can achieve specificity of recognition by forming bipartite interactions with their ligands. For example, NEMO has two modes of interaction with polyubiquitinated RIP1, one involving direct binding between NEMO and RIP1 and another involving recognition of RIP-conjugated polyubiquitin by the ubiquitin-binding domain (NUB/UBD/UBAN) of NEMO ( 9 ). Although either mode can be detected in isolation by in vitro and in vivo assays of protein interaction, both modes are required for physiological signaling in the NF-κB pathway ( 9 ). If a similar bipartite mechanism governs the interaction between UBXN1 and BRCA1, then UBXN1 may be able to discriminate autoubiquitinated BRCA1/BARD1 heterodimers from unmodified heterodimers and from other polypeptides conjugated with K6-linked polyubiquitin, as well as from free K6-linked chains. In this manner, UBXN1 would serve as a cellular receptor that specifically recognizes autoubiquitinated BRCA1/BARD1.

Recent work suggests that BRCA1-dependent ubiquitination, whether leading to autoubiquitination or to trans ubiquitination of heterologous substrates, is not required for all BRCA1 activities ( 42 ). This is exemplified by the fact that embryonic stem (ES) cells expressing enzymatically inert Brca1 are viable, whereas Brca1-null ES cells are not. In addition, cells lacking Brca1 ligase activity are competent for homology-directed repair (HDR) of double-strand DNA breaks, a pathway known to be dependent on Brca1. Consistent with these results, UBXN1 overexpression does not impair the HDR pathway (Fig. 12 ) despite the fact that it inhibits BRCA1 autoubiquitination in vivo (Fig. 9 and 11 ). Thus, the E3 ligase activity appears to be required for some, but not all, BRCA1 functions ( 42 ). Nonetheless, this activity is likely to be important given the stringent phylogenetic conservation of the BRCA1 RING domain and the occurrence of tumorigenic RING mutations in some families with hereditary breast cancer.

Since the consequences of BRCA1 autoubiquitination remain poorly understood, a precise role for UBXN1 in the BRCA1 pathway is difficult to ascertain. Nevertheless, our data show that UBXN1 dramatically inhibits the E3 ligase activity of BRCA1/BARD1 and that suppression of BRCA1 enzymatic function is dependent on the ubiquitin-binding activity of UBXN1. These findings suggest that UBXN1 serves as an inhibitor of the BRCA1/BARD1 complex that regulates its enzymatic activity in a manner that is dependent on the ubiquitination status of BRCA1. Of interest, this would allow for spatial and/or temporal control of BRCA1-mediated ubiquitination. Spatial regulation could be determined simply by the cellular distribution of UBXN1, such that high UBXN1 concentrations in a particular setting (e.g., the cytoplasm) would locally inhibit the E3 ligase activity of BRCA1/BARD1. In addition, the presence of UBXN1 may act to limit the duration of BRCA1 enzymatic function. In this scenario, physiological induction of BRCA1/BARD1 enzymatic activity, whether in response to DNA damage or other potential stimuli, would simultaneously promote trans ubiquitination of BRCA1 substrates and autoubiquitination of its BRCA1 subunit. While trans ubiquitination of its substrates would allow downstream effector functions of BRCA1 to ensue, BRCA1 autoubiquitination would enhance the affinity of UBXN1 for BRCA1/BARD1 and thereby promote UBXN1 inhibition of BRCA1/BARD1 enzymatic activity. This manner of feedback inhibition would ensure that the E3 ligase function of BRCA1/BARD1 is confined to a restricted time interval. Thus, although the mechanisms that govern the induction of BRCA1 enzymatic activity in vivo are not yet known, autoubiquitination and the consequent association with UBXN1 might provide an effective means to downregulate this activity where and when it is no longer required.
