---
pmid: '20223213'
title: Structures of an isopenicillin N converting Ntn-hydrolase reveal different
  catalytic roles for the active site residues of precursor and mature enzyme.
authors:
- Bokhove M
- Yoshida H
- Hensgens CM
- van der Laan JM
- Sutherland JD
- Dijkstra BW
journal: Structure
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2010.01.005
---

# Structures of an isopenicillin N converting Ntn-hydrolase reveal different catalytic roles for the active site residues of precursor and mature enzyme.
**Authors:** Bokhove M, Yoshida H, Hensgens CM, van der Laan JM, Sutherland JD, Dijkstra BW
**Journal:** Structure (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2010.01.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2010.01.005)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2010 Mar 10;18(3):301-8. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2010.01.005.

Structures of an isopenicillin N converting Ntn-hydrolase reveal different 
catalytic roles for the active site residues of precursor and mature enzyme.

Bokhove M(1), Yoshida H, Hensgens CM, van der Laan JM, Sutherland JD, Dijkstra 
BW.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biophysical Chemistry, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 
Groningen, Netherlands.

Penicillium chrysogenum Acyl coenzyme A:isopenicillin N acyltransferase (AT) 
performs the last step in the biosynthesis of hydrophobic penicillins, 
exchanging the hydrophilic side chain of a precursor for various hydrophobic 
side chains. Like other N-terminal nucleophile hydrolases AT is produced as an 
inactive precursor that matures upon posttranslational cleavage. The structure 
of a Cys103Ala precursor mutant shows that maturation is autoproteolytic, 
initiated by Cys103 cleaving its preceding peptide bond. The crystal structure 
of the mature enzyme shows that after autoproteolysis residues 92-102 fold 
outwards, exposing a buried pocket. This pocket is structurally and chemically 
flexible and can accommodate substrates of different size and polarity. Modeling 
of a substrate-bound state indicates the residues important for catalysis. 
Comparison of the proposed autoproteolytic and substrate hydrolysis mechanisms 
shows that in both events the same catalytic residues are used, but that they 
perform different roles in catalysis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2010.01.005
PMID: 20223213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
