---
pmid: '23386060'
title: hCAF1/CNOT7 regulates interferon signalling by targeting STAT1.
authors:
- Chapat C
- Kolytcheff C
- Le Romancer M
- Auboeuf D
- De La Grange P
- Chettab K
- Sentis S
- Corbo L
journal: EMBO J
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3594750
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.11
---

# hCAF1/CNOT7 regulates interferon signalling by targeting STAT1.
**Authors:** Chapat C, Kolytcheff C, Le Romancer M, Auboeuf D, De La Grange P, Chettab K, Sentis S, Corbo L
**Journal:** EMBO J (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2013.11](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2013.11)
**PMC:** [PMC3594750](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3594750/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2013 Mar 6;32(5):688-700. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.11. Epub 2013 Feb 5.

hCAF1/CNOT7 regulates interferon signalling by targeting STAT1.

Chapat C(1), Kolytcheff C, Le Romancer M, Auboeuf D, De La Grange P, Chettab K, 
Sentis S, Corbo L.

Author information:
(1)Université Lyon 1, Lyon, France.

Stringent regulation of the interferon (IFN) signalling pathway is essential for 
maintaining the immune response to pathogens and tumours. The transcription 
factor STAT1 is a crucial mediator of this response. Here, we show that 
hCAF1/CNOT7 regulates class I and II IFN pathways at different crucial steps. In 
resting cells, hCAF1 can control STAT1 trafficking by interacting with the 
latent form of STAT1 in the cytoplasm. IFN treatment induces STAT1 release, 
suggesting that hCAF1 may shield cytoplasmic STAT1 from undesirable stimulation. 
Consistently, hCAF1 silencing enhances STAT1 basal promoter occupancy associated 
with increased expression of a subset of STAT1-regulated genes. Consequently, 
hCAF1 knockdown cells exhibit an increased protection against viral infection 
and reduced viral replication. Furthermore, hCAF1 participates in the extinction 
of the IFN signal, through its deadenylase activity, by speeding up the 
degradation of some STAT1-regulated mRNAs. Since abnormal and unbalanced 
JAK/STAT activation is associated with immune disorders and cancer, hCAF1 could 
play a major role in innate immunity and oncogenesis, contributing to tumour 
escape.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2013.11
PMCID: PMC3594750
PMID: 23386060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Stringent regulation of the interferon (IFN) signalling pathway is essential for maintaining the immune response to pathogens and tumours. The transcription factor STAT1 is a crucial mediator of this response. Here, we show that hCAF1/CNOT7 regulates class I and II IFN pathways at different crucial steps. In resting cells, hCAF1 can control STAT1 trafficking by interacting with the latent form of STAT1 in the cytoplasm. IFN treatment induces STAT1 release, suggesting that hCAF1 may shield cytoplasmic STAT1 from undesirable stimulation. Consistently, hCAF1 silencing enhances STAT1 basal promoter occupancy associated with increased expression of a subset of STAT1-regulated genes. Consequently, hCAF1 knockdown cells exhibit an increased protection against viral infection and reduced viral replication. Furthermore, hCAF1 participates in the extinction of the IFN signal, through its deadenylase activity, by speeding up the degradation of some STAT1-regulated mRNAs. Since abnormal and unbalanced JAK/STAT activation is associated with immune disorders and cancer, hCAF1 could play a major role in innate immunity and oncogenesis, contributing to tumour escape.

Introduction

The CCR4–NOT complex is an evolutionarily conserved multi-subunit complex that regulates several aspects of eukaryotic gene expression, including the repression and activation of mRNA translation, control of mRNA elongation, deadenylation and subsequent degradation of mRNA and even protein degradation (for review, see Collart and Panasenko, 2012 and Miller and Reese, 2012 ). Deadenylase ( Tucker et al, 2001 ) and E3 ubiquitin ligase ( Panasenko and Collart, 2011 ) are two enzymatic activities that have been described for different subunits of the CCR4–NOT complex and could mediate most of its functions. The CAF1 and CCR4 subunits were initially identified as the major cytoplasmic deadenylases in budding yeast. Homologues of these proteins have been identified in Metazoa, indicating that this mRNA degradation pathway is evolutionarily conserved ( Denis and Chen, 2003 ; Bianchin et al, 2005 ; Bartlam and Yamamoto, 2010 ). Both proteins have been shown to localize to cytoplasmic P-bodies with translationally repressed mRNA and miRNAs ( Jakymiw et al, 2005 ; Pillai, 2005 ; Eulalio et al, 2009 ). CAF1 deadenylase activity has been shown to be responsible, at least in part, for miRNA-mediated gene repression ( Behm-Ansmant et al, 2006 ; Eulalio et al, 2009 ; Fabian et al, 2009 ). Furthermore, mammalian CAF1 appears to be a crucial partner of the antiproliferative BTG/TOB proteins ( Bogdan et al, 1998 ; Rouault et al, 1998 ; Ikematsu et al, 1999 ; Prevot et al, 2001 ) that are also implicated in mRNA turnover ( Ezzeddine et al, 2007 ; Mauxion et al, 2008 ). hCAF1 has also been described to regulates transcription of several nuclear receptors ( Prevot et al, 2001 ; Garapaty et al, 2008 ; Aslam et al, 2009 ) and the activity of the protein arginine methyl transferase PRMT1 ( Robin-Lespinasse et al, 2007 ).

The biological role of CAF1 has been examined in a range of eukaryotic species. In yeast, caf1-deleted strains are sensitive to high temperatures and caffeine ( Hata et al, 1998 ). In C. elegans , CAF1 is essential for embryonic and larval development ( Molin and Puisieux, 2005 ). Additionally, CAF1 is required for normal growth of trypanosomes ( Schwede et al, 2009 ). Mice that lack CAF1 are infertile due to impaired maturation of spermatogenic cells resulting in multiple defects during spermatic differentiation ( Berthet et al, 2004 ; Nakamura et al, 2004 ). In plants, CAF1 has been shown to be involved in both development and response to biotic stresses. The Arabidopsis CAF1-like gene regulates the deadenylation of stress responsive mRNAs and plant defence responses to pathogen infection ( Liang et al, 2009 ). Despite considerable progress in the understanding of CAF1-mediated regulation of gene expression, the physiological targets and the specific pathways by which it exerts its functions remain unclear.

In this study, we found that hCAF1 physically interacts with STAT1 and negatively regulates interferon (IFN)/STAT1 signalling by acting at different crucial steps of this pathway. Accordingly, hCAF1 depletion resulted in a hyper-activated subset of STAT1-regulated genes that led to retarded cell growth and an enhanced response to viral infection.

Discussion

Living organisms are constantly exposed to a variety of internal and external stimuli. The innate immune system is genetically programmed to rapidly detect and respond to infection by viruses or other pathogens and to play a key role in immune surveillance of tumours ( Dunn et al, 2006 ). A successful innate immune response requires the action of type I or II IFNs and the activation, via phosphorylation, of latent cytosolic transcription factors, STATs, as crucial mediators of this response. When phosphorylated, STATs form homodimers or heterodimers, move to the nucleus and activate the transcription of target genes ( Bromberg et al, 2000 ; Ramana et al, 2000 ; Levy et al, 2002 ).

Although innate immunity is essential for host defence, aberrant activation of innate immune responses results in the development of autoimmune diseases and cancer. It is therefore not unexpected that this signalling pathway is tightly regulated to avoid either deficient or excessive responses. In fact, the magnitude and degree of STAT signalling is regulated by various mechanisms, including post-translational protein modifications and interaction with regulatory proteins ( Levy et al, 2002 ).

In this report, we have defined a novel role for hCAF1 in the negative regulation of type I or II IFN signalling. Consistently, knockdown of hCAF1 renders cells more resistant to viral infection and reduced viral replication ( Figure 2E ).

Notably, we have found that hCAF1 forms a complex with the latent form of STAT1 in the cytoplasm of several cell lines ( Figure 6Da ; Supplementary Figures 7 and 8A and C ). IFN treatment of cells induced the dissociation of the complex ( Figure 6Db ; Supplementary Figures 8B and C ) permitting the release of STAT1 and its migration to the nucleus. Since the level of hCAF1 was not affected by IFN treatment ( Supplementary Figure 3B ), it is reasonable to attribute the dissociation of hCAF1/STAT1 complex to the phosphorylation and consequent nuclear migration of STAT1 ( Figures 4Da and c ). These results suggest that the formation of this complex in the cytoplasm may prevent the inappropriate migration of STAT1 in unstimulated conditions. The phosphorylation of STAT1 on tyrosine 701, following IFN stimulation and JAK activation, is crucial for dimerization and nuclear migration. However, IFN treatment of hCAF1 kd cells reduced phosphorylation of STAT1 ( Figure 4A ), although we observed an increased amount of some STAT1-target transcripts ( Figure 4B ). It will be interesting to determine whether hCAF1 plays a role in the regulation of STAT1 phosphorylation and thereby its activation and migration.

Nuclear trafficking, which involves a complex combination of active and passive mechanisms and has a significant impact on STAT functions, might constitute another important ‘check-point’ in IFN/STAT signalling. This idea is further supported by several lines of evidence. Knockdown of hCAF1 resulted in a high basal transcriptional activation of STAT1 and a subset of STAT1-regulated genes. Furthermore, our results showed a local decondensation of chromatin structure within some STAT1-target promoters associated with the recruitment of STAT1 and H4 hyperacetylation, in the absence of any induction ( Figure 5 ). Figure 4A clearly shows that STAT1 is not phosphorylated in resting hCAF1 kd cells therefore we postulate that the constitutive expression of some STAT1-target genes in the absence of IFN induction, is, at least in part, consequent to the high concentration of STAT1 protein. However, the group of G.R. Stark has demonstrated that the forced expression of exogenous u-STAT1 was linked with increased expression of a class of genes ( Cheon et al, 2009 ) previously reported to be upregulated in chemo- or radiation-resistant cancer cells overexpressing u-STAT1 ( Weichselbaum et al, 2008 ) and classified as ‘IFN-related DNA damage signature’ ( Khodarev et al, 2012 ). Interestingly, many of these genes are also upregulated in hCAF1-depleted cells (see Supplementary Table 1 ) indicating that hCAF1 can be potentially involved in cellular resistance to genotoxic stress and in prosurvival functions of STAT1. Overall, these data indicate that high amounts of u-STAT1 may, directly or not, affect the chromatin architecture of discrete genomic regions. One intriguing possibility can be that u-STAT1, when overexpressed and in absence of stimuli, can migrate to the nucleus and associate with compacted chromatin on a class of IFN-inducible promoters, acting as a ‘pioneer’ factor. These bindings would increase accessibility for subsequent transcription factor recruitments, permitting the expression of a particular class of genes, which can confer, for example, the chemo- or radiation-resistant phenotype described for several types of tumours ( Weichselbaum et al, 2008 ). This effect can be reminiscent of the phenomena described for the HLA locus where IFN treatment induces rapid higher order chromatin modifications generating ‘primed’ transcriptionally permissive environment which facilitates subsequent inductions ( Christova et al, 2007 ). In line with this hypothesis, hCAF1 depletion also correlates with the re-organization of PML NBs, which have been associated with transcriptionally active ‘memory’ parts of the genome after the IFN response ( Figure 2D ).

On the other hand, a direct association between high expression of u-STAT1 and DNA damage-resistant phenotype has been described in Drosophila , in which u-STAT92E localizes on heterochromatin maintaining the stability of transcriptionally repressed heterochromatin ( Shi et al, 2008 ). Strikingly, animals with high levels of u-STAT92E exhibit increased levels of heterochromatin associated with increased survival rate after genotoxic stress ( Yan et al, 2011 ). We can imagine that u-STAT1 could also be able to silence specific domains of the genome by recruiting co-repressors, as described for several pioneer factors ( Zaret and Carroll, 2011 ). As Jak/STAT1 signalling is one of mechanisms of the tumour cell elimination in early stages of many tumour development, we can hypothesize that tumour cells in ‘secondary prolonged’ response ( Cheon et al, 2009 ), associated with u-STAT1 transcription and primed chromatin, are more resistant to genotoxic stress and can be responsible for the selection of aggressive phenotype tumour clones.

The molecular events leading to the deregulation of STAT1 observed in hCAF1 kd cells are illustrated in Figure 7A . In the absence of hCAF1, a fraction of u-STAT1 migrates to the nucleus and induces the expression of STAT1 itself, thus creating a positive feedback loop that enhances its expression. In parallel, u-STAT1 stimulates the expression of several target products whose stability is prolonged by the loss of hCAF1 deadenylase activity in these cells, leading to their accumulation.

On the basis of our results we propose a model for a previously unpredictable mechanism regulating the functions of STAT1. In Figure 7B , we illustrate how hCAF1, through its interaction with STAT1, could regulate IFN signalling at different crucial steps: (i) in resting unstimulated cells, by controlling STAT1 trafficking and (ii) in IFN-activated cells by participating to the extinction of IFN response ( Figure 7B ).

Despite we cannot rule out that hCAF1 interacts with and regulates STAT1 outside of the CCR4–NOT complex, increasing number of biochemical, genetic and structural studies point out that CAF1 protein, in yeast and mammalian cells, exists and acts within the CCR4–NOT multifunctional complex. Furthermore, the involvement of this complex in IFN-mediated gene activation is in agreement with its emerging role as a chaperone regulatory platform ( Collart and Timmers, 2004 ). The CCR4–NOT complex, in addition to its housekeeping functions, can efficiently and rapidly adapt cellular gene expression in response to changes in environmental conditions and stimuli. The innate immune response to infection by viruses or other pathogens is in fact initiated by an induction phase which rapidly responds to external aggression, followed by a downregulation of the response. Since the CCR4–NOT complex acts at all levels of gene expression, from transcription to decay (mRNA or protein), it permits the rapid adaptation of cells to external stresses.

To prevent excessive responses to IFNs, hCAF1 could participate in the extinction of the IFN signal via its deadenylase activity, by accelerating the degradation of some STAT1-induced mRNAs. Notably, although CCR4/CAF1 deadenylase can potentially remove poly(A) tails from any mRNA species, hCAF1 knockdown differentially affected the stability of STAT1-induced transcripts. This selectivity could be explained by differential ‘marks’ of degradation on mRNAs, as theorized by Parker ( Tucker et al, 2001 ). The emerging idea that mRNAs are marked for degradation during transcription is supported by recent results from genome-wide gene expression, establishing that mRNA production and decay are strongly linked ( Shalem et al, 2011 ; Bregman et al, 2011 ). Moreover, fast-induced responsive genes, as is the case for the STAT1-target genes, display a corresponding rapid destabilization of their mRNAs ( Shalem et al, 2008 ). Consistently, our previous data indicated that the different regulatory roles in which the CCR4–NOT complex is involved, notably transcription and mRNA turnover, may occur via distinct complexes, whose size, composition and cellular localization changes during the cell cycle ( Morel et al, 2003 ). Further studies may provide insight into the molecular mechanism determining and coordinating the rate of both mRNA synthesis and decay in IFN signalling. Focus on this pathway might be an appealing approach to explore how a simple complex, such as CCR4–NOT, can regulate an mRNA from ‘birth to death’. These findings identify hCAF1 as a key factor in IFN-negative regulation playing a physiologically important role in the maintenance of immune homeostasis, especially with regard to regulation of the innate immune response. Since abnormal and unbalanced JAK/STAT activation is associated with immune disorders, cancer and cellular resistance to DNA-damaging agents, hCAF1 could play a major role in oncogenesis, contributing to tumour escape. Therefore, our results give the basis to decode the molecular properties and functions of u-STAT1 and the role of its increased expression in the selection of therapy-resistant cancer clones. Finally, hCAF1 and the CCR4–NOT complex have potential useful therapeutic targets for enhancing immunity against microbial infections and inflammation-associated diseases.
