---
pmid: '12878730'
title: The p53-dependent effects of macrophage migration inhibitory factor revealed
  by gene targeting.
authors:
- Fingerle-Rowson G
- Petrenko O
- Metz CN
- Forsthuber TG
- Mitchell R
- Huss R
- Moll U
- Müller W
- Bucala R
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2003'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC170922
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1533295100
---

# The p53-dependent effects of macrophage migration inhibitory factor revealed by gene targeting.
**Authors:** Fingerle-Rowson G, Petrenko O, Metz CN, Forsthuber TG, Mitchell R, Huss R, Moll U, Müller W, Bucala R
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1533295100](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1533295100)
**PMC:** [PMC170922](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC170922/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Aug 5;100(16):9354-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1533295100. Epub 2003 Jul 23.

The p53-dependent effects of macrophage migration inhibitory factor revealed by 
gene targeting.

Fingerle-Rowson G(1), Petrenko O, Metz CN, Forsthuber TG, Mitchell R, Huss R, 
Moll U, Müller W, Bucala R.

Author information:
(1)The Picower Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY 11030, USA. 
g.fingerle-rowson@gmx.de

Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is a mediator of host immunity and 
functions as a high, upstream activator of cells within the innate and the 
adaptive immunological systems. Recent studies have suggested a potentially 
broader role for MIF in growth regulation because of its ability to antagonize 
p53-mediated gene activation and apoptosis. To better understand MIF's activity 
in growth control, we generated and characterized a strain of MIF-knockout 
(MIF-KO) mice in the inbred, C57BL/6 background. Embryonic fibroblasts from 
MIF-KO mice exhibit p53-dependent growth alterations, increased p53 
transcriptional activity, and resistance to ras-mediated transformation. 
Concurrent deletion of the p53 gene in vivo reversed the observed phenotype of 
cells deficient in MIF. In vivo studies showed that fibrosarcomas induced by the 
carcinogen benzo[alpha]pyrene are smaller in size and have a lower mitotic index 
in MIF-KO mice relative to their WT counterparts. The data provide direct 
genetic evidence for a functional link between MIF and the p53 tumor suppressor 
and indicate an important and previously unappreciated role for MIF in 
carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1533295100
PMCID: PMC170922
PMID: 12878730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is a mediator of host immunity
 and functions as a high, upstream activator of cells within the innate and the
 adaptive immunological systems. Recent studies have suggested a potentially
 broader role for MIF in growth regulation because of its ability to antagonize
 p53-mediated gene activation and apoptosis. To better understand MIF's
 activity in growth control, we generated and characterized a strain of
 MIF-knockout (MIF-KO) mice in the inbred, C57BL/6 background. Embryonic
 fibroblasts from MIF-KO mice exhibit p53-dependent growth alterations,
 increased p53 transcriptional activity, and resistance to ras -mediated transformation. Concurrent deletion of the p53 gene in vivo reversed the observed phenotype of cells deficient in MIF. In vivo studies showed that fibrosarcomas induced by the carcinogen
 benzo[α]pyrene are smaller in size and have a lower mitotic index in
 MIF-KO mice relative to their WT counterparts. The data provide direct genetic
 evidence for a functional link between MIF and the p53 tumor suppressor and
 indicate an important and previously unappreciated role for MIF in
 carcinogenesis.

Materials and Methods

Generation of MIF-Deficient Mice. A genomic DNA fragment containing
 the MIF gene was isolated from a 129/Sv P1 library (Incyte Genomics,
 Palo Alto, CA). A 5.2-kb Pst I– Bgl II fragment
 containing the MIF gene, including the promoter region and exons 1,
 2, and 3, was cloned between the loxP sites of the vector pEasyFlox
 (kindly provided by M. Alimzhanov, Institute of Genetics, Cologne, Germany).
 Additional regions of homology (a 6-kb upstream and a 3.8-kb downstream
 fragment) flanking the MIF locus were cloned into pEasyFlox before
 and after the loxP sites, respectively
 ( Fig. 1 ). C57BL/6 embryonic
 stem (ES) cells were transfected with the targeting vector and subjected to
 double selection with G418 and gancyclovir. Targeted ES cell clones were
 identified by Southern blot hybridization using external 5′ and 3′
 probes. Two targeted ES clones were transiently transfected with a plasmid
 expressing Cre recombinase. ES clones deleted for both MIF and neo were microinjected into BALB/c blastocysts. Chimeras gave
 germ-line transmission and the offspring were bred to homozygosity to produce
 a population of MIF-KO mice on the pure C57BL/6 background.

MIF – / – p53 – / – double-KO (DKO) mice were generated by crossing between the MIF-KO and
 previously reported Trp-53 tm1Tyj mice
 ( 23 ). The genotype of each
 group of mice was verified by PCR amplification specific for the corresponding
 WT and mutant alleles. Primer sequences are available on request.

Cells and Tissue Culture. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) were
 prepared from embryonic day 14.5 embryos from the
 MIF + / + ,
 MIF – / – ,
 p53 – / – , and
 MIF – / – p53 – / – mice using standard techniques. In some experiments, as indicated, we used
 MEFs that were derived from reported MIF-KO mice
 ( 24 ) that were backcrossed to
 the BALB/c background for six generations. Unless specified, passage 4–6
 MEFs were used.

Retroviral Constructs. The replication-defective retroviral vector
 REBNA ( 25 ) was used. For viral
 infections, 10 5 MEFs cultured in 6-cm plates were incubated
 overnight with an appropriate amount of the corresponding retroviral
 stock.

Expression Analyses. The list of antibodies is available on
 request.

One-Stage Carcinogenesis Model. C57BL/6 female, 12- to 16-week-old
 WT and MIF-KO littermates ( n = 20 per group) were injected s.c. in
 the right flank with 2 mg of benzo[α]pyrene (Sigma) in 200 μl of
 olive oil on days 1 and 8. Mice were killed when tumor incidence reached 100%
 in the WT group (week 16) and tumors were processed for pathological
 examination. Tumor vascularization was assessed by immunohistochemical
 staining for smooth muscle actin (HHF35; DAKO).

Two-Stage Carcinogenesis Model. Eight- to 12-week-old, BALB/c WT and
 MIF-KO females (gift of J. David, Harvard Medical School, Boston; n =
 15 per group) were shaved and 25 μg of 7,12-dimethylbenz[α]anthracene
 (DMBA) in 100 μl of acetone was applied to intact skin on days 1 and 8.
 Tumor formation was promoted by using 12- O -tetradecanoylphorbol
 13-acetate (TPA; 4 μg in 100 μl acetone, three times a week) for 23
 weeks.

Statistical Analysis. Data are expressed as mean ± SD.
 Statistical analysis was performed by using a two-tailed Student's t test.

Results

Generation of MIF-KO Mice. MIF-KO mice have been recently reported
 by two research groups ( 24 , 29 ). These two mouse strains
 show an inconsistency in their immunological phenotype (resistance to
 endotoxic shock), which may be due to the mixed genetic background in which
 they were created, or to the gene targeting strategies. To obviate these
 difficulties, we elected to use the Cre-loxP gene targeting technique
 ( 26 ) and C57BL/6 ES cells to
 generate a complete (5.2 kb) deletion of the MIF locus in a pure
 genetic background. The deletion included (from 5′ to 3′): the
 3′ end of a nonfunctional retrotransposon of the intracisternal
 A-particle type (IAP) located upstream of the MIF gene
 ( 27 ), the promoter of the MIF gene, and MIF exons 1, 2, and 3
 ( Fig. 1 A ). Homologous
 recombination of the targeting vector was confirmed by Southern hybridization
 by using 5′ and 3′ external probes
 ( Fig. 1 B ). Because neo -containing selectable cassettes have the potential to affect the
 expression of genes over distances of >100 kb
 ( 28 ), we chose to excise the loxP -flanked neomycin-resistance marker by using a transiently
 expressed Cre recombinase. Correct excision of the MIF gene was verified by
 Southern blotting ( Fig.
 1 C ), and by PCR specific for the WT and the MIF-KO
 alleles ( Fig. 1 D ).

After blastocyst injection and germ-line transmission of the chimeric mice,
 MIF + / – heterozygous mice were bred in
 the genetically pure, C57BL/6 background. Southern analysis of genomic DNA and
 Northern hybridization of cellular RNA derived from the tissues of WT,
 heterozygous MIF + / – , and homozygous
 MIF – / – KO mice confirmed the
 deletion of the MIF gene ( Fig. 2 A and B ). Consistent with this finding,
 immunoblot analysis (R102) showed no MIF expression in the MIF-KO mice
 ( Fig. 2 C ).

Mice with the MIF-KO genotype are born at the expected Mendelian ratios in
 the heterozygous intercrosses (MIF + / + :
 MIF + / – :
 MIF – / – in males 39:69:35; in
 females 36:93:47). MIF-KO mice show no developmental abnormalities, are
 fertile, and produce litters of normal size (6.5 pups per litter, n =
 32 litters). The spontaneous death rate of MIF-KO mice is low and similar to
 that of WT littermates. At 6 weeks of age, the weight of MIF-KO mice also was
 comparable to that of control WT mice (males:
 MIF + / + 18.2 ± 1.7 g,
 MIF – / – 18.8 ± 2.4 g;
 females: MIF + / + 16.2 ± 1.1 g,
 MIF – / – 16.4 ± 1.3 g, P = not significant, n = 16 per group). Flow cytometric
 analysis of leukocyte subsets from the peripheral blood of MIF-KO mice showed
 no abnormalities in the distribution of lymphoid or myeloid lineages compared
 with WT mice (data not shown).

Growth Alterations in MIF-KO Fibroblasts. Previous studies
 ( 19 ) suggested that MIF may
 act as a functional p53 antagonist. To examine this possibility, MEFs were
 prepared from MIF-KO and WT mice and characterized in cell-based assays.
 Exponentially growing MIF-KO and WT fibroblasts showed similar proliferation
 rates ( Fig. 3 A ).
 However, MIF-KO fibroblasts growth arrested at saturating cell densities that
 were 20–30% lower compared with that of WT MEFs
 ( Fig. 3 B ). Similar
 results were obtained by using WT and MIF-KO fibroblasts derived from the
 respective BALB/c mice ( Fig.
 3 B ).

Immunoblot analyses of continuously cycling WT and MIF-KO fibroblasts
 showed similar expression levels for p53 and its downstream target products,
 such as p21 CIP1 (p21) and MDM2
 ( Fig. 3 C ). However,
 cycling MIF-KO fibroblasts showed increased levels of the activated (phospho)
 extracellular-regulated kinase (ERK)-1/2. By contrast, the expression levels
 of the retinoblastoma protein (Rb)-related cell-cycle regulators, p107 and
 p130, were lower in cycling MIF-KO fibroblasts
 ( Fig. 3 C ). It has been
 shown that Rb, p107, and p130 regulate the activity of E2F transcription
 factors in a cell type-specific manner at different stages of the cell cycle
 ( 30 ). Whereas p130 appears to
 be prominent in quiescent and differentiated cells
 ( 31 , 32 ), p107 is the most abundant
 Rb-related protein present in the nuclei of S-phase cells
 ( 33 , 34 ). Consistent with these
 observations, synchronized MIF-KO fibroblasts entered the S-phase and
 completed DNA synthesis in a uniform fashion, as assessed by 3 H-thymidine incorporation ( Fig.
 3 D ). Although p107 is a direct target for E2F-regulation
 ( 35 ), the expression of
 several other E2F-responsive gene products, including cyclin A, cyclin E,
 CDC6, and B-Myb, was similar in both the MIF-KO and the WT cells (data not
 shown). Collectively, these results suggest that the growth alteration
 observed in MIF-KO fibroblasts is likely due to the induction of premature
 arrest, rather than to a defect in cell division.

Premature Growth Arrest in MIF-KO Fibroblasts Is p53-Dependent. The
 growth arrest in MIF-KO MEFs was associated with higher expression levels of
 p16 INK4A (p16), and the downstream target of p53,
 p21 CIP1 ( Fig.
 3 C ). It has been noted that mitogen-activated protein
 kinase (MAPK) activation involves up-regulation of p53 and p16
 ( 36 ). Conversely, continuous
 expression of p53 results in a sustained activation of the MAPK cascade by a
 mechanism involving the epidermal growth factor receptor
 ( 37 , 38 ). To determine whether the
 growth differences between the MIF-KO and WT fibroblasts could be attributed
 to the altered status of p53 in MIF-KO cells, we produced
 MIF – / – p53 – / – DKO mice by crossing the MIF-KO mice with
 p53 – / – mice, both on the C57BL/6
 background ( 23 ). The deletion
 of both the MIF and the Trp53 genes was confirmed by PCR and
 Western blot analyses ( Fig. 4 A and C ). MEFs derived from DKO and
 p53 – / – mice exhibited similar
 proliferation properties ( Fig.
 4 B ). Closer examination showed equivalent expression
 levels of p130, p107, and p16 by DKO and
 p53 – / – MEFs, whereas p21 was not
 expressed at detectable levels ( Fig.
 4 C ). The levels of ERK phosphorylation also were similar
 between the two cell types ( Fig.
 4 C ). Taken together, these results indicate that the
 growth alterations observed in MIF-KO fibroblast are to a large degree
 p53-dependent.

MIF Modulates DNA Damage-Induced p53 Transactivation. Various stress
 conditions, including DNA damage, oncogene activation, and hypoxia can induce
 a p53-specific response ( 39 ).
 We next assessed p21 activation in MIF-KO and WT MEFs after exposure to the
 DNA-damaging agent, cisplatin. The induction of p21 expression was more
 pronounced in the MIF-KO than in the WT fibroblasts
 ( Fig. 5 A and B ). This induction of p21 also was p53-dependent, because
 DKO MEFs failed to accumulate detectable p21 protein when exposed to similar
 stress conditions ( Fig.
 5 C ).

The Reduced Susceptibility of MIF-KO Fibroblasts to Ras-Mediated
 Transformation Is p53-Dependent. The incorporation of activated oncogenes
 into rodent cells induces p53-dependent replicative arrest and the expression
 of senescence-associated markers
 ( 40 ). Transduction of MIF-KO
 and WT fibroblasts with replication-defective retroviruses expressing a
 constitutively active H- ras V12 mutant also produced growth
 inhibition ( Fig. 6 A ).
 The expression of the negative cell-cycle regulators, p53, p19 ARF (ARF), Rb, and p16, was similar between the two cell types (data not shown).
 However, the induction of senescence-like morphology and the expression of
 senescence-associated β-galactosidase (SA-β Gal), were more rapid in
 the H- ras V12 -transduced MIF-KO cells than in the
 corresponding WT transductants ( Fig.
 6 B ).

Tumor cell growth is frequently associated with a disruption of the Rb
 tumor suppressor pathway ( 41 ).
 We next expressed H- ras V12 in conjunction with the
 adenovirus E1A protein. E1A-expressing fibroblasts behave like Rb-deficient
 cells in that their increased proliferative capacity is accompanied by an
 increased sensitivity to E2F1- and p53-dependent apoptosis
 ( 42 ). In several independent
 experiments, MIF-KO MEFs coexpressing E1A and ras produced
 transformed colonies with a 50% lower efficiency when compared with the
 corresponding WT MEFs, as assessed by focus formation assays
 ( Fig. 7 A and Table 1 ). Immunoblot analysis
 of the transformed MIF-WT and KO cells showed similar levels of E1A expression
 ( Fig. 7 B ). The levels
 of E1A binding to the Rb family proteins also were similar in the two cell
 types (data not shown). However, the differences in colony formation between
 MIF-KO and WT MEFs correlated with a generally lower proliferation rate by the
 transformed MIF-KO cultures ( Fig.
 7 C ), and by smaller transformed foci
 ( Fig. 7 A Upper ). Similar results were obtained by using myc - and ras -transformed MIF-WT and KO fibroblasts
 ( Table 1 ).

To test whether the differences in the transforming capacity of MIF-KO
 fibroblasts were p53-dependent, we studied the effect of the simian virus 40
 large T-antigen (LT), the oncogenic properties of which depend on its ability
 to inactivate both Rb and p53
 ( 43 ). After the introduction
 of oncogenic ras , LT-expressing MIF-KO and WT fibroblasts were
 readily transformed and produced equally numerous foci and soft agar colonies
 ( Table 1 ). Similarly,
 expression of constitutively active
 H- ras V12 ,N- ras D12 ,orK- ras V12 mutants in p53 – / – and DKO
 fibroblasts resulted in equivalent transformation efficiency
 ( Fig. 7 D ). These
 results are consistent with the reported ability of MIF to modulate p53
 activity ( 19 ). This MIF effect
 does not involve down-regulation of ARF expression, because the transformed
 MIF-KO and WT fibroblasts contained equivalent levels of the ARF protein
 ( Fig. 7 B ).

Reduced Development of Benzo[α]pyrene-Induced Fibrosarcomas in
 MIF-Deficient Mice. To directly address the possibility that MIF plays a
 role in the generation of the transformed phenotype, we studied tumorigenesis
 in MIF-KO mice. Initially, we used a two-stage protocol of skin
 carcinogenesis, which includes the application of DMBA, followed by multiple
 applications of TPA. This approach results in the development of benign skin
 tumors that often contain a characteristic mutation in the codon 61 of the
 cellular H -ras gene but retain intact p53
 ( 44 ). Because C57BL/6 mice are
 relatively resistant to skin carcinogenesis
 ( 45 ), we used MIF-KO mice
 ( 24 ), which were backcrossed
 to the BALB/c background for six generations. During the time course of this
 experiment, tumor incidence and multiplicity were similar between the MIF-KO
 and WT mice ( Fig. 8 A ).
 Because ras -mediated tumorigenesis depends on signaling pathways that
 act through cyclin D1 ( 46 ),
 our results indicate that the Ras-MAPK-cyclin D1 pathway is fully functional
 in MIF-KO cells in vivo . Tumor regression began earlier in MIF-KO
 mice than in the WTs ( P < 0.05).

In a second approach, 12- to 16-week-old female C57BL/6 MIF-KO and WT mice
 were injected s.c. in the right flank with the carcinogen,
 benzo[α]pyrene (B[α]P). Treatment with B[α]P produces
 stochastic mutations, which frequently involve cellular protooncogenes such as ras , and tumor suppressor genes, including Trp53 ( 47 , 48 ). Mutations that
 concurrently occur within the context of a single cell then will result in
 tumorigenic conversion. Within 4 months, all of the MIF-KO and WT mice
 injected with B[α]P developed sizable tumors. Histologically, tumors
 from both genotypes were characterized as high-grade fibroleiomyosarcomas
 (smooth muscle actin-positive, mitotic index >20/10 high power fields).
 Although no differences were found between the MIF-WT and KO mice with respect
 to tumor incidence, MIF deficiency was associated with a lower mitotic rate
 (MIF + / + 79 ± 26,
 MIF – / – 46 ± 10 mitoses/10
 high-power fields, Fig. 8 B and C Upper, P = 0.003) and smaller tumor size
 (MIF + / + 2.6 ± 1.7 g,
 MIF – / – 1.3 ± 0.9 g, P = 0.002). Tumor tissues from MIF-KO and MIF-WT smooth muscle actin
 (SMA)-positive vessels and SMA-negative small capillaries were vascularized
 similarly. Areas of necrosis were present in tumors from both genotypes, but
 were larger in the MIF-WT hosts ( Fig.
 8 C Lower ), which may be a result of hypoxia or
 acidosis developing in faster growing tumors.

Discussion

Macrophage MIF is an important regulator of host immunity as evidenced by
 numerous experimental and clinical studies
 ( 2 ). Another spectrum of action
 for MIF has emerged as the result of the finding by Hudson et al. ( 19 ) that MIF inhibits
 p53-transcriptional activity in cell-based, functional assays. MIF
 overexpression was found to extend the lifespan of fibroblasts in
 vitro , to inhibit myc -induced p53-dependent apoptosis, and to
 protect macrophages from NO-induced apoptosis. The potential importance of
 this activity has increased in the light of studies showing that MIF is
 expressed in different human tumors, and at levels that may correlate with
 tumor aggressiveness
 ( 11 – 15 , 49 ).

To test the relevance of MIF as a growth regulator, we generated a strain
 of MIF-KO mice on the pure C57BL/6 background. Consistent with previous
 reports ( 24 , 29 ), MIF deficiency did not
 cause any obvious developmental defects. The MIF-KO mice nevertheless exhibit
 a distinct phenotype with respect to growth control and tumorigenesis.
 Cultured embryonic fibroblasts derived from these mice showed increased
 sensitivity to contact inhibition and resistance to ras -mediated
 transformation. Importantly, both of these properties are largely
 p53-dependent and appear to result from enhanced p53 transcriptional activity
 in the MIF-KO cells. These observations were validated in vivo by
 studies showing retardation in the development of malignant tumors in MIF-KO
 mice when compared with WT controls.

A previous study ( 50 ) has
 shown that MIF can influence cell growth and transformation in vitro in cells on the mixed 129/Sv × C57BL/6 background, however the
 mechanisms were suggested to reflect both p53-dependent and p53-independent
 pathways. Whereas the p53-independent effects of MIF deficiency rely primarily
 on the inappropriate induction of E2F transcriptional activity, this article
 clearly indicates that the E2F-dependent phenotype caused by the loss of MIF
 is minimal on the pure C57BL/6 background. Moreover, deletion of the p53 gene
 completely abrogates the effects of MIF deficiency in cells derived from
 C57BL/6 mice. Differences in the functional status of individual E2F family
 members between the 129/Sv and C57BL/6 mice have been noted. The loss of E2f1 extends the lifespan of
 Rb + / – 129/Sv mice to a greater extent
 than in the corresponding C57BL/6 background
 ( 51 ). Conversely, the
 homozygous deletion of the E2f3 gene is lethal on the 129/Sv
 background, whereas the presence of C57BL/6 alleles rescues this phenotype
 ( 52 ). Accordingly, the
 possibility exists that MIF ,ora MIF -associated gene, acts as
 a genetic modifier between the 129/Sv and C57BL/6 murine strains.

The p53 tumor suppressor plays at least two distinct roles in preventing
 inappropriate proliferation: induction of cell-cycle arrest, and induction of
 apoptosis, which eliminates cells with damaged genomes. Cell-cycle arrest and
 apoptosis are mechanistically distinct
 ( 53 ), and a spectrum of genes
 that are controlled by p53 in a positive or negative manner have been
 identified ( 54 ). It is well
 documented that p53 affects the expression of different groups of genes,
 depending on the nature of stimuli; however, little is known about the
 molecular mechanism of p53 action. Several studies have provided information
 that p53 may change histone acetylation and chromatin condensation at specific
 chromosomal sites. For example, p53-mediated activation of the p21 gene
 requires recruitment of histone acetyltransferase (HAT) p300 to the p21
 promoter ( 55 ), p53-dependent
 expression of MDM2 involves recruitment of HAT complexes containing the
 ATM-related TRRAP cofactor
 ( 56 ), and p53-mediated
 repression of Map4 and stathmin genes relies on an association with histone
 deacetylase complexes ( 57 ).
 MIF may affect the interaction between p53 and its cofactors.

MIF is remarkably well conserved and its homologues are encoded in
 evolutionarily divergent species, including different vertebrates, worms
 [ Caenorhabditis elegans, ( 58 )], insects [ Amblyomma
 americanum ( 59 )], plants
 [ Arabidopsis thaliana ( 60)], and even archaic unicellular eukaryotes,
 such as Entamoeba histolytica (GenBank accession no. AZ542000 ) and Giardia intestinalis (GenBank accession no. AC056441 ). In C.
 elegans , the role for MIF in growth regulation is supported further by
 its nuclear localization in developing embryos and by its up-regulation during
 the dauer stage, a condition of starvation and developmental arrest that
 allows the nematode to survive adverse conditions
 ( 58 ). In mammals, MIF has been
 primarily implicated in the pathogenesis of inflammatory disease, based on its
 increased expression at sites of inflammation and the protective effect of MIF
 immunoneutralization ( 2 ). The
 role of p53-dependent apoptosis in the immune system is known to be
 significant during B- and T-lymphopoiesis
 ( 61 , 62 ), in protection from
 genotoxic stressors ( 63 , 64 ), and in sustaining
 monocyte/macrophage activation responses
 ( 65 ). This article emphasizes
 the possibility that inhibition of p53 by MIF may be critical for the
 development of tumors that arise at sites of chronic inflammation, such as
 colon cancer in ulcerative colitis
 ( 66 ) and gastric cancer in Helicobacter pylori infection
 ( 67 ).
