---
pmid: '10913169'
title: Cks1 is required for G(1) cyclin-cyclin-dependent kinase activity in budding
  yeast.
authors:
- Reynard GJ
- Reynolds W
- Verma R
- Deshaies RJ
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC86063
doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.16.5858-5864.2000
---

# Cks1 is required for G(1) cyclin-cyclin-dependent kinase activity in budding yeast.
**Authors:** Reynard GJ, Reynolds W, Verma R, Deshaies RJ
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.20.16.5858-5864.2000](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.20.16.5858-5864.2000)
**PMC:** [PMC86063](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC86063/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Aug;20(16):5858-64. doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.16.5858-5864.2000.

Cks1 is required for G(1) cyclin-cyclin-dependent kinase activity in budding 
yeast.

Reynard GJ(1), Reynolds W, Verma R, Deshaies RJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 
91125, USA.

p13(suc1) (Cks) proteins have been implicated in the regulation of 
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) activity. However, the mechanism by which Cks 
influences the function of cyclin-CDK complexes has remained elusive. We show 
here that Cks1 is required for the protein kinase activity of budding yeast G(1) 
cyclin-CDK complexes. Cln2 and Cdc28 subunits coexpressed in 
baculovirus-infected insect cells fail to exhibit protein kinase activity 
towards multiple substrates in the absence of Cks1. Cks1 can both stabilize 
Cln2-Cdc28 complexes and activate intact complexes in vitro, suggesting that it 
plays multiple roles in the biogenesis of active G(1) cyclin-CDK complexes. In 
contrast, Cdc28 forms stable, active complexes with the B-type cyclins Clb4 and 
Clb5 regardless of whether Cks1 is present. The levels of Cln2-Cdc28 and 
Cln3-Cdc28 protein kinase activity are severely reduced in cks1-38 cell 
extracts. Moreover, phosphorylation of G(1) cyclins, which depends on Cdc28 
activity, is reduced in cks1-38 cells. The role of Cks1 in promoting G(1) 
cyclin-CDK protein kinase activity both in vitro and in vivo provides a simple 
molecular rationale for the essential role of CKS1 in progression through G(1) 
phase in budding yeast.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.20.16.5858-5864.2000
PMCID: PMC86063
PMID: 10913169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

p13 suc1 (Cks) proteins have been implicated in the regulation of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) activity. However, the mechanism by which Cks influences the function of cyclin-CDK complexes has remained elusive. We show here that Cks1 is required for the protein kinase activity of budding yeast G 1 cyclin-CDK complexes. Cln2 and Cdc28 subunits coexpressed in baculovirus-infected insect cells fail to exhibit protein kinase activity towards multiple substrates in the absence of Cks1. Cks1 can both stabilize Cln2-Cdc28 complexes and activate intact complexes in vitro, suggesting that it plays multiple roles in the biogenesis of active G 1 cyclin-CDK complexes. In contrast, Cdc28 forms stable, active complexes with the B-type cyclins Clb4 and Clb5 regardless of whether Cks1 is present. The levels of Cln2-Cdc28 and Cln3-Cdc28 protein kinase activity are severely reduced in cks1-38 cell extracts. Moreover, phosphorylation of G 1 cyclins, which depends on Cdc28 activity, is reduced in cks1-38 cells. The role of Cks1 in promoting G 1 cyclin-CDK protein kinase activity both in vitro and in vivo provides a simple molecular rationale for the essential role of CKS1 in progression through G 1 phase in budding yeast.
