---
pmid: '26175413'
title: CHZ868, a Type II JAK2 Inhibitor, Reverses Type I JAK Inhibitor Persistence
  and Demonstrates Efficacy in Myeloproliferative Neoplasms.
authors:
- Meyer SC
- Keller MD
- Chiu S
- Koppikar P
- Guryanova OA
- Rapaport F
- Xu K
- Manova K
- Pankov D
- O'Reilly RJ
- Kleppe M
- McKenney AS
- Shih AH
- Shank K
- Ahn J
- Papalexi E
- Spitzer B
- Socci N
- Viale A
- Mandon E
- Ebel N
- Andraos R
- Rubert J
- Dammassa E
- Romanet V
- Dölemeyer A
- Zender M
- Heinlein M
- Rampal R
- Weinberg RS
- Hoffman R
- Sellers WR
- Hofmann F
- Murakami M
- Baffert F
- Gaul C
- Radimerski T
- Levine RL
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC4503933
doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.06.006
---

# CHZ868, a Type II JAK2 Inhibitor, Reverses Type I JAK Inhibitor Persistence and Demonstrates Efficacy in Myeloproliferative Neoplasms.
**Authors:** Meyer SC, Keller MD, Chiu S, Koppikar P, Guryanova OA, Rapaport F, Xu K, Manova K, Pankov D, O'Reilly RJ, Kleppe M, McKenney AS, Shih AH, Shank K, Ahn J, Papalexi E, Spitzer B, Socci N, Viale A, Mandon E, Ebel N, Andraos R, Rubert J, Dammassa E, Romanet V, Dölemeyer A, Zender M, Heinlein M, Rampal R, Weinberg RS, Hoffman R, Sellers WR, Hofmann F, Murakami M, Baffert F, Gaul C, Radimerski T, Levine RL
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccell.2015.06.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2015.06.006)
**PMC:** [PMC4503933](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4503933/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2015 Jul 13;28(1):15-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.06.006.

CHZ868, a Type II JAK2 Inhibitor, Reverses Type I JAK Inhibitor Persistence and 
Demonstrates Efficacy in Myeloproliferative Neoplasms.

Meyer SC(1), Keller MD(1), Chiu S(1), Koppikar P(1), Guryanova OA(1), Rapaport 
F(1), Xu K(2), Manova K(2), Pankov D(3), O'Reilly RJ(3), Kleppe M(1), McKenney 
AS(1), Shih AH(1), Shank K(1), Ahn J(1), Papalexi E(1), Spitzer B(1), Socci 
N(4), Viale A(4), Mandon E(5), Ebel N(5), Andraos R(5), Rubert J(5), Dammassa 
E(5), Romanet V(5), Dölemeyer A(5), Zender M(5), Heinlein M(5), Rampal R(6), 
Weinberg RS(7), Hoffman R(8), Sellers WR(9), Hofmann F(5), Murakami M(5), 
Baffert F(5), Gaul C(5), Radimerski T(10), Levine RL(11).

Author information:
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(2)Molecular Cytology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10065, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY 10065, USA.
(4)Center for Molecular Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY 10065, USA.
(5)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Basel 4056, Switzerland.
(6)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA; Leukemia Service, Department of Medicine, 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(7)New York Blood Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(9)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
(10)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Basel 4056, Switzerland. 
Electronic address: thomas.radimerski@novartis.com.
(11)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA; Leukemia Service, Department of Medicine, 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic 
address: leviner@mskcc.org.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2015 Jul 13;28(1):1-2. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.06.010.

Although clinically tested JAK inhibitors reduce splenomegaly and systemic 
symptoms, molecular responses are not observed in most myeloproliferative 
neoplasm (MPN) patients. We previously demonstrated that MPN cells become 
persistent to type I JAK inhibitors that bind the active conformation of JAK2. 
We investigated whether CHZ868, a type II JAK inhibitor, would demonstrate 
activity in JAK inhibitor persistent cells, murine MPN models, and MPN patient 
samples. JAK2 and MPL mutant cell lines were sensitive to CHZ868, including type 
I JAK inhibitor persistent cells. CHZ868 showed significant activity in murine 
MPN models and induced reductions in mutant allele burden not observed with type 
I JAK inhibitors. These data demonstrate that type II JAK inhibition is a viable 
therapeutic approach for MPN patients.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.06.006
PMCID: PMC4503933
PMID: 26175413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) are myeloid malignancies which present as clonal expansion of one or more myeloid lineages( Dameshek, 1951 ). The most common MPN are polycythemia vera (PV), essential thrombocytosis (ET), and primary myelofibrosis (PMF). These MPN are characterized by an increased risk of thrombosis and bleeding, transformation to acute leukemia, and bone marrow fibrosis. Mutational studies identified somatic JAK2 V617F mutations in ~95% of PV and ~50-60% of ET/PMF cases ( Baxter et al., 2005 ; James et al., 2005 ; Kralovics et al., 2005 ; Levine et al., 2005 ; Zhao et al., 2005 ). Subsequent studies identified JAK2 exon 12 mutations in JAK2 V617F-negative PV( Scott et al., 2007 ), MPL (thrombopoietin receptor) mutations in JAK2 V617F-negative ET/PMF cases ( Beer et al., 2008 ; Pardanani et al., 2006 ; Pikman et al., 2006 ; Vannucchi et al., 2008 ), and CALR mutations in JAK2/MPL wild-type ET/PMF cases ( Klampfl et al., 2013 ; Nangalia et al., 2013 ).

These discoveries, underscored by recent studies showing that activated JAK-STAT signaling is a characteristic feature of MPN ( Rampal et al., 2014 ), have led to the clinical development of JAK kinase inhibitors in these diseases. In 2011 the JAK1/JAK2 inhibitor ruxolitinib was approved for PMF and post-PV/ET myelofibrosis (MF). Therapy with ruxolitinib and other JAK kinase inhibitors ameliorates splenomegaly and constitutional symptoms in MF patients ( Harrison et al., 2012 ; Verstovsek et al., 2012 ) and longer term follow-up suggests ruxolitinib therapy is associated with improved survival compared to placebo or best available therapy ( Cervantes et al., 2013 ; Verstovsek et al., 2013 ).

Despite these clinical benefits, chronic therapy with JAK inhibitors has not led to molecular or pathologic remissions in the majority of MPN patients ( Harrison et al., 2012 ; Verstovsek et al., 2012 ) in contrast to ABL kinase inhibitors in chronic myeloid leukemia. The observation that MPN patients do not acquire second-site resistance mutations in JAK2 during JAK inhibitor therapy suggested MPN cells are able to survive JAK kinase inhibition in the absence of clonal evolution. We recently demonstrated that MPN cells can acquire an adaptive form of resistance, which we termed persistence, to JAK inhibitors through reactivation of JAK-STAT signaling via heterodimerization and trans-activation of JAK2 by JAK1 and TYK2 ( Koppikar et al., 2012 ). shRNA and genetic studies demonstrate that MPN cells remain highly dependent on JAK2 even after in vivo treatment with JAK inhibitors, suggesting approaches which better inhibit JAK2 kinase activity might offer increased therapeutic efficacy ( Bhagwat et al., 2014 ).

Current JAK2 inhibitors in clinical development are type I kinase inhibitors, which stabilize the active kinase conformation. A recent study reported that BBT594, a type II kinase inhibitor originally devised to inhibit the T315I BCR-ABL resistance allele, was able to inhibit JAK2 activity in vitro. BBT594 binds JAK2 in the inactive conformation (“DFG-out” state), where the inhibitor occupies the ATP binding site and an induced hydrophobic pocket ( Andraos et al., 2012 ). The inactive conformation was stabilized consistent with decreased phosphorylation of the activation loop. However, BBT594 has limitations in potency and in selectivity for JAK2, and does not have pharmacokinetic properties for in vivo use. Thus, there is a need to develop type II JAK2 inhibitors with improved potency, selectivity and pharmacokinetics. Here, we investigate the activity of CHZ868, a type II JAK2 inhibitor, in JAK inhibitor persistent cells, preclinical MPN models, and patient samples as an additional approach to therapeutic targeting of JAK2.

Discussion

Genetic and functional studies have shown that constitutive JAK signaling is a pathogenetic feature of classical MPN, mostly due to activating mutations in JAK2 itself, or less commonly due to mutations in MPL , LNK ( Tong et al., 2005 ) or CBL ( Schwaab et al., 2012 ). These insights have underscored the development of JAK inhibitors, and the clinical use of ruxolitinib for the treatment of MPN patients. Despite the significant benefits offered by ruxolitinib( Harrison et al., 2012 ; Verstovsek et al., 2012 ), the lack of molecular or pathologic responses with chronic JAK inhibitor therapy has suggested there are limits to the efficacy of type I JAK inhibitors. Here we show that type II JAK2 inhibition with CHZ868 can reverse type I JAK inhibitor persistence and can reduce disease burden in preclinical MPN models.

The development of ruxolitinib encouraged studies on a class of ATP-competitive JAK inhibitors, which stabilize JAK2 in the active conformation. Additional type I JAK inhibitors with slightly different kinase specificities are in late-stage clinical development. CYT387, a JAK1 and JAK2 inhibitor similar to ruxolitinib with additional activity against TBK1 and IKKε( Zhu et al., 2014 ), is being evaluated in phase 2 and 3 trials of MF and PV, while BMS911543, a selective JAK2 inhibitor, is in a phase 1/2 study. The clinical trials with the JAK2/FLT3 inhibitor SAR302503 were recently halted due to CNS toxicity. These additional type I JAK inhibitors may provide further therapeutic options for MPN patients, including those who fail or cannot tolerate ruxolitinib therapy. However, we observed that despite being highly active in naive MPN cells, the different type I inhibitors elicit persistence through the same mechanism of heterodimeric JAK2 activation we previously described for ruxolitinib. Moreover, we found that cells cultured in the presence of CYT387, BMS911543 or SAR302503 were cross-persistent to all other type I JAK inhibitors, including ruxolitinib. These findings suggest that additional mechanisms of JAK inhibition should be explored to improve efficacy in patients who do not derive sufficient clinical benefit from chronic ruxolitinib therapy.

The limitations of type I JAK inhibitors in the clinic have prompted investigations of resistance to these agents. Several groups have identified second-site JAK2 mutations in saturation mutagenesis screens performed in the presence of type I JAK inhibition, but these mutations have not been identified in MPN patients ( Deshpande et al., 2012 ; Weigert et al., 2012 ). These data strongly suggest that the limited therapeutic efficacy of type I JAK2 inhibitors is due to insufficient target inhibition and not due to genetic resistance. Recent studies have suggested that combining JAK inhibitors with inhibition of key downstream pathways, such as PI3K/Akt, might increase therapeutic efficacy and are now being explored in preclinical models and clinically( Fiskus et al., 2013 ). In addition, we and others have recently shown that combined JAK2 and HSP90 or HDAC inhibition shows increased efficacy in vivo( Bhagwat et al., 2014 ; Evrot et al., 2013 ; Marubayashi et al., 2010 ). However, these approaches require investigation of combinations, and may result in increased toxicity due to inhibition of multiple, essential cellular pathways.

We therefore investigated the efficacy of type II JAK2 inhibition with CHZ868, which binds JAK2 in the inactive conformation in contrast to type I inhibitors that bind JAK2 in the active form. CHZ868 had similar efficacy in type I JAK inhibitor naive and persistent cells and a bias towards inhibition of mutant JAK2 V617F over wild-type JAK2, consistent with a different mechanism of JAK kinase inhibition. We observed potent suppression of JAK signaling, proliferation, and induction of apoptosis in MPN cells by CHZ868 regardless of previous exposure to type I JAK inhibitors. These data demonstrate that type I JAK inhibitor persistent cells remain sensitive to type II JAK inhibitors, and that CHZ868 retains therapeutic efficacy in cells which acquire insensitivity to clinically utilized JAK inhibitors. We hypothesized that the mechanism by which type II inhibition abrogates cross-persistence relates to the stabilization of JAK2 in the inactive conformation. This may occur by blocking JAK2 monomers in the inactive state and shifting the equilibrium away from JAK heterodimers which contain the active form of the kinase. Alternatively, type II inhibition might overcome cross-persistence by directly inhibiting JAK2 in the heterodimers. CHZ868 promptly inactivated JAK2 incorporated in JAK heterodimers, and JAK-STAT signaling was simultaneously abrogated without a requirement for heterodimer dissociation. Concordant with a bias towards inhibition of JAK2 over JAK1 and TYK2, CHZ868 suppressed transphosphorylation of kinase-dead JAK2 at the activation loop, suggesting that CHZ868 renders the JAK2 activation loop inaccessible for transphosphorylation. We found a differential interference of CHZ868 with inhibition of activating phosphorylation events at Y1007/1008 and at Y221, and preserved phosphorylation at regulatory sites in the pseudokinase domain at Y570 and S523 resulting in a net, profound inhibition of heterodimeric JAK2. These findings suggest that inactivation of heterodimeric JAK2 by type II inhibition involves differential changes in the accessibility of functionally different phospho-sites interfering with transactivation.

Consistent with the in vitro data, in preclinical models of Jak2 V617F-induced PV and MPL W515L-induced MF, CHZ868 treatment reversed MPN hallmarks, including splenomegaly, pathologic erythrocytosis, thrombocytosis and leukocytosis, and alterations in bone marrow progenitor populations induced by constitutive Jak2 or MPL mutant alleles. CHZ868 therapy attenuated reticulin fibrosis, a key pathologic MF trait that persists with chronic type I JAK inhibitor therapy. Most importantly, CHZ868 therapy induced a significant decrease in mutant allele burden in preclinical models of PV and MF based on an increased susceptibility of Jak2 V617F and MPL W515L cells to CHZ868 in vitro and in vivo. The molecular and histologic responses seen with CHZ868 therapy suggest a disease-modifying effect of type II JAK inhibition in MPN, similar to that observed with CHZ868 in JAK2 R683G mutated B-ALL models (cf. accompanying manuscript by Wu S-C et al).

Although subsequent preclinical and clinical studies are needed to delineate efficacy and toxicity of type II JAK inhibition, these data suggest that alternate mechanisms of kinase inhibition can increase therapeutic benefit. We anticipate that similar approaches for other mutated kinases might offer similar benefit in other malignant contexts. Most importantly, our data demonstrate that current approaches to target JAK2 have not fully tested the dependency for JAK2 kinase activity in the clinical contexts, and suggest the need to explore additional approaches to improve target inhibition in the malignant clone, and to improve outcomes for patients with MPNs, as well as with other malignancies characterized by activated JAK2 signaling.
