---
pmid: '8788039'
title: Distinct patterns of Fas cell surface expression during development of T- or
  B-lymphocyte lineages in normal, scid, and mutant mice lacking or overexpressing
  p53, bcl-2, or rag-2 genes.
authors:
- Li T
- Ramirez K
- Palacios R
journal: Cell Growth Differ
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
---

# Distinct patterns of Fas cell surface expression during development of T- or B-lymphocyte lineages in normal, scid, and mutant mice lacking or overexpressing p53, bcl-2, or rag-2 genes.
**Authors:** Li T, Ramirez K, Palacios R
**Journal:** Cell Growth Differ (1996)

## Abstract

1. Cell Growth Differ. 1996 Jan;7(1):107-14.

Distinct patterns of Fas cell surface expression during development of T- or 
B-lymphocyte lineages in normal, scid, and mutant mice lacking or overexpressing 
p53, bcl-2, or rag-2 genes.

Li T(1), Ramirez K, Palacios R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston 77030, USA.

Fas is a cell membrane protein involved in programmed cell death. In normal 
young mice, Fas was expressed on pluripotent stem cells, multipotent 
progenitors, pro-T and pre-T cells, most thymocytes, and a subset of CD4 and CD8 
mature T lymphocytes. In contrast, Fas expression was switched off in B-cell and 
myelocytic progenitors and most pro-B and a proportion of pre-B cells and was 
switched on again later, but this occurred only in a subset of mature B 
lymphocytes. A lack of bcl-2 increased the proportion of Fas+ B-lymphocyte 
lineage cells and Fas+ CD4+ cells and decreased the percentage of Fas- CD8+ 
mature T-cell subsets. Overexpression of bcl-2 reversed this pattern of Fas cell 
surface expression. Interestingly, lack of p53 increased the proportions of 
Fas-expressing CD4 and CD8 mature T-cell subsets and of Fas- B-cell precursors 
but decreased that of Fas- mature B-lymphocyte populations. We conclude that the 
expression of Fas is regulated distinctly during the development of T and B 
lymphocytes. Although the products of neither bcl-2 nor p53 genes are essential 
for Fas cell surface expression on hematopoietic cells, these repressor and 
effector genes, respectively, of programmed cell death affect distinct subsets 
of lymphoid lineage cells at different stages of lymphopoiesis. Our results 
suggest that distinct combinations of effector and suppressor genes of 
programmed cell death act on distinct cell populations and at different stages 
of differentiation within the same cell lineage in the hematopoietic system.

PMID: 8788039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
