---
pmid: '17525332'
title: ATM and ATR substrate analysis reveals extensive protein networks responsive
  to DNA damage.
authors:
- Matsuoka S
- Ballif BA
- Smogorzewska A
- McDonald ER 3rd
- Hurov KE
- Luo J
- Bakalarski CE
- Zhao Z
- Solimini N
- Lerenthal Y
- Shiloh Y
- Gygi SP
- Elledge SJ
journal: Science
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.1140321
---

# ATM and ATR substrate analysis reveals extensive protein networks responsive to DNA damage.
**Authors:** Matsuoka S, Ballif BA, Smogorzewska A, McDonald ER 3rd, Hurov KE, Luo J, Bakalarski CE, Zhao Z, Solimini N, Lerenthal Y, Shiloh Y, Gygi SP, Elledge SJ
**Journal:** Science (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1140321](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1140321)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2007 May 25;316(5828):1160-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1140321.

ATM and ATR substrate analysis reveals extensive protein networks responsive to 
DNA damage.

Matsuoka S(1), Ballif BA, Smogorzewska A, McDonald ER 3rd, Hurov KE, Luo J, 
Bakalarski CE, Zhao Z, Solimini N, Lerenthal Y, Shiloh Y, Gygi SP, Elledge SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Center for Genetics and Genomics, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2007 May 25;316(5828):1138-9. doi: 10.1126/science.1143700.

Cellular responses to DNA damage are mediated by a number of protein kinases, 
including ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) and ATR (ATM and Rad3-related). 
The outlines of the signal transduction portion of this pathway are known, but 
little is known about the physiological scope of the DNA damage response (DDR). 
We performed a large-scale proteomic analysis of proteins phosphorylated in 
response to DNA damage on consensus sites recognized by ATM and ATR and 
identified more than 900 regulated phosphorylation sites encompassing over 700 
proteins. Functional analysis of a subset of this data set indicated that this 
list is highly enriched for proteins involved in the DDR. This set of proteins 
is highly interconnected, and we identified a large number of protein modules 
and networks not previously linked to the DDR. This database paints a much 
broader landscape for the DDR than was previously appreciated and opens new 
avenues of investigation into the responses to DNA damage in mammals.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1140321
PMID: 17525332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
