---
pmid: '19794492'
title: Robust discrimination between self and non-self neurites requires thousands
  of Dscam1 isoforms.
authors:
- Hattori D
- Chen Y
- Matthews BJ
- Salwinski L
- Sabatti C
- Grueber WB
- Zipursky SL
journal: Nature
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2836808
doi: 10.1038/nature08431
---

# Robust discrimination between self and non-self neurites requires thousands of Dscam1 isoforms.
**Authors:** Hattori D, Chen Y, Matthews BJ, Salwinski L, Sabatti C, Grueber WB, Zipursky SL
**Journal:** Nature (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature08431](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08431)
**PMC:** [PMC2836808](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2836808/)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2009 Oct 1;461(7264):644-8. doi: 10.1038/nature08431.

Robust discrimination between self and non-self neurites requires thousands of 
Dscam1 isoforms.

Hattori D(1), Chen Y, Matthews BJ, Salwinski L, Sabatti C, Grueber WB, Zipursky 
SL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, David 
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
California 90095, USA.

Down Syndrome cell adhesion molecule (Dscam) genes encode neuronal cell 
recognition proteins of the immunoglobulin superfamily. In Drosophila, Dscam1 
generates 19,008 different ectodomains by alternative splicing of three exon 
clusters, each encoding half or a complete variable immunoglobulin domain. 
Identical isoforms bind to each other, but rarely to isoforms differing at any 
one of the variable immunoglobulin domains. Binding between isoforms on opposing 
membranes promotes repulsion. Isoform diversity provides the molecular basis for 
neurite self-avoidance. Self-avoidance refers to the tendency of branches from 
the same neuron (self-branches) to selectively avoid one another. To ensure that 
repulsion is restricted to self-branches, different neurons express different 
sets of isoforms in a biased stochastic fashion. Genetic studies demonstrated 
that Dscam1 diversity has a profound role in wiring the fly brain. Here we show 
how many isoforms are required to provide an identification system that prevents 
non-self branches from inappropriately recognizing each other. Using homologous 
recombination, we generated mutant animals encoding 12, 24, 576 and 1,152 
potential isoforms. Mutant animals with deletions encoding 4,752 and 14,256 
isoforms were also analysed. Branching phenotypes were assessed in three classes 
of neurons. Branching patterns improved as the potential number of isoforms 
increased, and this was independent of the identity of the isoforms. Although 
branching defects in animals with 1,152 potential isoforms remained substantial, 
animals with 4,752 isoforms were indistinguishable from wild-type controls. 
Mathematical modelling studies were consistent with the experimental results 
that thousands of isoforms are necessary to ensure acquisition of unique Dscam1 
identities in many neurons. We conclude that thousands of isoforms are essential 
to provide neurons with a robust discrimination mechanism to distinguish between 
self and non-self during self-avoidance.

DOI: 10.1038/nature08431
PMCID: PMC2836808
PMID: 19794492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Down Syndrome cell adhesion molecule ( Dscam ) genes encode neuronal cell recognition proteins of the immunoglobulin superfamily 1 , 2 . In Drosophila , Dscam1 generates 19,008 different ecto-domains by alternative splicing of three exon clusters, each encoding half or a complete variable immunoglobulin domain 3 . Identical isoforms bind to each other, but rarely to isoforms differing at any one of the variable immunoglobulin domains 4 , 5 . Binding between isoforms on opposing membranes promotes repulsion 6 . Isoform diversity provides the molecular basis for neurite self-avoidance 6 – 11 . Self-avoidance refers to the tendency of branches from the same neuron (self-branches) to selectively avoid one another 12 . To ensure that repulsion is restricted to self-branches, different neurons express different sets of isoforms in a biased stochastic fashion 7 , 13 . Genetic studies demonstrated that Dscam1 diversity has a profound role in wiring the fly brain 11 . Here we show how many isoforms are required to provide an identification system that prevents non-self branches from inappropriately recognizing each other. Using homologous recombination, we generated mutant animals encoding 12, 24, 576 and 1,152 potential isoforms. Mutant animals with deletions encoding 4,752 and 14,256 isoforms 14 were also analysed. Branching phenotypes were assessed in three classes of neurons. Branching patterns improved as the potential number of isoforms increased, and this was independent of the identity of the isoforms. Although branching defects in animals with 1,152 potential isoforms remained substantial, animals with 4,752 isoforms were indistinguishable from wild-type controls. Mathematical modelling studies were consistent with the experimental results that thousands of isoforms are necessary to ensure acquisition of unique Dscam1 identities in many neurons. We conclude that thousands of isoforms are essential to provide neurons with a robust discrimination mechanism to distinguish between self and non-self during self-avoidance.

METHODS SUMMARY

Dscam1 576-isoform and Dscam1 12-isoform mutant alleles were generated essentially as described 11 ( Supplementary Fig. 1 ). At least two independent recombinants were generated for each allele encoding distinct variants, and these were used to generate homozygous mutants to avoid effects from potential second site mutations (for example, Dscam1 x.y.25a / Dscam1 x.y.25b ). Molecular characterization of these mutants was performed essentially as described 11 . Immunostaining was performed essentially as described 6 , 11 . The branching patterns of posterior scutellar mechanosensory neurons were analysed by DiI tracing as described 18 , 22 . The branching patterns of different exon 4 deletion mutants were scored blindly to avoid potential bias in scoring (for details of the scoring method, see Supplementary Fig. 4 and Methods). Pair-wise comparisons of branch occurrence between genotypes were performed by Fisher’s exact test. Comparisons between genotypes that account for all branches were conducted using a permutation-based test. Because a large number of comparisons are carried out in this study, we used the Bonferroni criteria to correct for multiple testing.
