---
pmid: '25368161'
title: Trajectory and genomic determinants of fungal-pathogen speciation and host
  adaptation.
authors:
- Hu X
- Xiao G
- Zheng P
- Shang Y
- Su Y
- Zhang X
- Liu X
- Zhan S
- St Leger RJ
- Wang C
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4250126
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1412662111
---

# Trajectory and genomic determinants of fungal-pathogen speciation and host adaptation.
**Authors:** Hu X, Xiao G, Zheng P, Shang Y, Su Y, Zhang X, Liu X, Zhan S, St Leger RJ, Wang C
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1412662111](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1412662111)
**PMC:** [PMC4250126](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4250126/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Nov 25;111(47):16796-801. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1412662111. Epub 2014 Nov 3.

Trajectory and genomic determinants of fungal-pathogen speciation and host 
adaptation.

Hu X(1), Xiao G(1), Zheng P(1), Shang Y(1), Su Y(2), Zhang X(2), Liu X(2), Zhan 
S(1), St Leger RJ(3), Wang C(4).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Insect Developmental and Evolutionary Biology, Institute of 
Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200032, China;
(2)State Key Laboratory of Mycology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China; and.
(3)Department of Entomology, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742.
(4)Key Laboratory of Insect Developmental and Evolutionary Biology, Institute of 
Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200032, China; cswang@sibs.ac.cn.

Much remains unknown regarding speciation. Host-pathogen interactions are a 
major driving force for diversification, but the genomic basis for speciation 
and host shifting remains unclear. The fungal genus Metarhizium contains species 
ranging from specialists with very narrow host ranges to generalists that attack 
a wide range of insects. By genomic analyses of seven species, we demonstrated 
that generalists evolved from specialists via transitional species with 
intermediate host ranges and that this shift paralleled insect evolution. We 
found that specialization was associated with retention of sexuality and rapid 
evolution of existing protein sequences whereas generalization was associated 
with protein-family expansion, loss of genome-defense mechanisms, genome 
restructuring, horizontal gene transfer, and positive selection that accelerated 
after reinforcement of reproductive isolation. These results advance 
understanding of speciation and genomic signatures that underlie pathogen 
adaptation to hosts.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1412662111
PMCID: PMC4250126
PMID: 25368161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Much remains unknown regarding speciation. Host–pathogen interactions are a major driving force for diversification, but the genomic basis for speciation and host shifting remains unclear. The fungal genus Metarhizium contains species ranging from specialists with very narrow host ranges to generalists that attack a wide range of insects. By genomic analyses of seven species, we demonstrated that generalists evolved from specialists via transitional species with intermediate host ranges and that this shift paralleled insect evolution. We found that specialization was associated with retention of sexuality and rapid evolution of existing protein sequences whereas generalization was associated with protein-family expansion, loss of genome-defense mechanisms, genome restructuring, horizontal gene transfer, and positive selection that accelerated after reinforcement of reproductive isolation. These results advance understanding of speciation and genomic signatures that underlie pathogen adaptation to hosts.

Discussion

It is still frequently argued that, if evolution were true, there should be more transitional species existing today ( 1 ). In this paper, we established that the evolutionary direction of Metarhizium speciation is from specialists to transitional species with an intermediate host range and then to generalists able to attack diverse hosts. Our analyses suggest that MAJ and MGU represent transitional species during the shift from narrow to broad host range Metarhizium species. In addition to their intermediate evolutionary positioning ( Fig. 2 A ), MAJ and MGU have a host range limited to two insect orders and resemble specialists in not producing infection structures in glycerol ( Fig. S1 ). On the other hand, MAJ and MGU genome sizes and encoding capacities are similar to those of generalist species. In addition, the presence of both MAT1-1 and MAT1-2 in MAJ suggests a homothallic pattern that differs from the heterothallic nature of other clavicipitacean species ( 46 ). Analysis of the MAT loci in mammalian pathogenic Cryptococcus spp. also revealed a transitional mating system, which has been converted to a heterothallic system in most species ( 33 ). MAJ may represent a similar transitional state. It is easier for fungi to lose sex than to regain it ( 47 ); therefore, the absence of an opposite MAT locus in the closely related MGU suggests that MGU might have recently diverged from MAJ and sustained gene loss. In general, Metarhizium speciation could provide a model for the evolution of host preference, specificity, and virulence in other pathogens. The analysis of three Fusarium species also suggested a transitional pattern from specialist to generalist, coupled with genome and protein family expansions ( 14 ). However, a few oomycete plant-pathogenic Phytophthora spp. with clear host records seem to have transitioned from generalist to specialist ( 48 ) so the general applicability of our data to other pathogens remains to be determined.

Clearly, there are factors missing from specialists that limit their ability to cause disease in multiple insects as demonstrated by an increase in host range after transfer of genes from generalist strains to the specialist MAC ( 10 ). Nevertheless, the large number of rapidly evolving genes in MAC shows that it has not remained functionally static, but specialization of MAC to acridids has involved rapid evolution of existing protein sequences rather than the extensive gene duplication shown in generalists. Classical theory predicts that specialists will be more likely than generalists to lose sex to prevent reassortment of well-adapted gene combinations ( 47 ), but lack of RIP in generalist Metarhizium species suggests that they are less likely than specialists to have cryptic sex or a recent sexual history. We speculate that an increase in protein-coding composition after loss of RIP in generalists facilitated their opportunistic lifestyles for different insect hosts. Similarly, the broad host range plant pathogen Fusarium oxysporum lacks RIP whereas the cereal specialists Fusarium graminearum and Fusarium verticillioides have strong RIP effects ( 14 ), suggesting that this pattern may be common in related fungal species with a wide range of host preferences. The vast majority (∼95%) of cataloged strains of the seven sequenced Metarhizium species in the Agricultural Research Service Collection of Entomopathogenic Fungal Cultures (ARSEF) belong to generalist species ( www.ars.usda.gov/News/docs.htm?docid=12125 ), suggesting that this relationship is where most biodiversity within the Metarhizium genus resides and that broad host range is linked to ecological fitness.

Consistent with observations in other organisms ( 1 , 4 ), speciation in Metarhizium was coupled with TE-mediated gene mutations and genome restructuring, HGT events, gene duplications, and positive selection. Reproductive isolation (RI) to halt genomic homogenization is the hallmark of new species emergence ( 1 ). In animals and plants, RI is reinforced by selection against maladapted hybrids ( 49 ). We found that sex-related genes are similarly distributed in Metarhizium species, but the nonspecialist species have many more HET proteins than do the specialists. In fungi, RI-like vegetative incompatibility mediated by HET proteins determines nonself recognition and cell death ( 30 ) and contributes to speciation ( 28 ). Thus, fungi may resemble plants and animals ( 49 ) in exhibiting RI reinforcement but mediated through the function of vegetative incompatibility.

In conclusion, our results provide clear connections between phenotype, genotype, and pathogen fitness that underlie the evolutionary trajectory of speciation and host adaptation. Except for examples from the fossil records, failure to identify existing transitional species has long hindered our understanding of speciation continuums ( 1 ). Having multiple genomes is providing a dynamic picture of the evolving species boundary and how genomic differentiation unfolds through time during speciation. In particular, the identification of existing transitional species not only solidifies the evolutionary theory of speciation continuum but also provides a roadmap for identifying variation crucial in the origins of biodiversity and host shifting.
