---
pmid: '23776175'
title: SASH1 is a scaffold molecule in endothelial TLR4 signaling.
authors:
- Dauphinee SM
- Clayton A
- Hussainkhel A
- Yang C
- Park YJ
- Fuller ME
- Blonder J
- Veenstra TD
- Karsan A
journal: J Immunol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200583
---

# SASH1 is a scaffold molecule in endothelial TLR4 signaling.
**Authors:** Dauphinee SM, Clayton A, Hussainkhel A, Yang C, Park YJ, Fuller ME, Blonder J, Veenstra TD, Karsan A
**Journal:** J Immunol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.1200583](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1200583)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2013 Jul 15;191(2):892-901. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200583. Epub
2013  Jun 17.

SASH1 is a scaffold molecule in endothelial TLR4 signaling.

Dauphinee SM(1), Clayton A, Hussainkhel A, Yang C, Park YJ, Fuller ME, Blonder 
J, Veenstra TD, Karsan A.

Author information:
(1)Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British 
Columbia V5Z 1L3, Canada.

Recognition of microbial products by TLRs is critical for mediating innate 
immune responses to invading pathogens. In this study, we identify a novel 
scaffold protein in TLR4 signaling called SAM and SH3 domain containing protein 
1 (SASH1). Sash1 is expressed across all microvascular beds and functions as a 
scaffold molecule to independently bind TRAF6, TAK1, IκB kinase α, and IκB 
kinase β. This interaction fosters ubiquitination of TRAF6 and TAK1 and promotes 
LPS-induced NF-κB, JNK, and p38 activation, culminating in increased production 
of proinflammatory cytokines and increased LPS-induced endothelial migration. 
Our findings suggest that SASH1 acts to assemble a signaling complex downstream 
of TLR4 to activate early endothelial responses to receptor activation.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200583
PMID: 23776175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
