---
pmid: '15226449'
title: Distinct regions of the interleukin-7 receptor regulate different Bcl2 family
  members.
authors:
- Jiang Q
- Li WQ
- Hofmeister RR
- Young HA
- Hodge DR
- Keller JR
- Khaled AR
- Durum SK
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC434255
doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.14.6501-6513.2004
---

# Distinct regions of the interleukin-7 receptor regulate different Bcl2 family members.
**Authors:** Jiang Q, Li WQ, Hofmeister RR, Young HA, Hodge DR, Keller JR, Khaled AR, Durum SK
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.24.14.6501-6513.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.14.6501-6513.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC434255](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC434255/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jul;24(14):6501-13. doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.14.6501-6513.2004.

Distinct regions of the interleukin-7 receptor regulate different Bcl2 family 
members.

Jiang Q(1), Li WQ, Hofmeister RR, Young HA, Hodge DR, Keller JR, Khaled AR, 
Durum SK.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunoregulation, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Frederick, Maryland 
21702-1201, USA.

The antiapoptotic function of the interleukin-7 (IL-7) receptor is related to 
regulation of three members of the Bcl2 family: synthesis of Bcl2, 
phosphorylation of Bad, and cytosolic retention of Bax. Here we show that, in an 
IL-7-dependent murine T-cell line, different regions of the IL-7 receptor 
initiate the signal transduction pathways that regulate these proteins. Both 
Box1 and Y449 are required to signal Bcl2 synthesis and Bax cytosolic retention. 
This suggests a sequential model in which Jak1, which binds to Box1, is first 
activated and then phosphorylates Y449, leading to Bcl2 and Bax regulation, 
accounting for approximately 90% of the survival function. Phosphorylation of 
Bad required Box1 but not Y449, suggesting that Jak1 also initiates an 
additional signaling cascade that accounts for approximately 10% of the survival 
function. Stat5 was activated from the Y449 site but only partially accounted 
for the survival signal. Proliferation required both Y449 and Box1. Thymocyte 
development in vivo showed that deletion of Y449 eliminated 90% of alphabeta 
T-cell development and completely eliminated gammadelta T-cell development, 
whereas deleting Box 1 completely eliminated both alphabeta and gammadelta 
T-cell development. Thus the IL-7 receptor controls at least two distinct 
pathways, in addition to Stat5, that are required for cell survival.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.14.6501-6513.2004
PMCID: PMC434255
PMID: 15226449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The antiapoptotic function of the interleukin-7 (IL-7) receptor is related to regulation of three members of the Bcl2 family: synthesis of Bcl2, phosphorylation of Bad, and cytosolic retention of Bax. Here we show that, in an IL-7-dependent murine T-cell line, different regions of the IL-7 receptor initiate the signal transduction pathways that regulate these proteins. Both Box1 and Y449 are required to signal Bcl2 synthesis and Bax cytosolic retention. This suggests a sequential model in which Jak1, which binds to Box1, is first activated and then phosphorylates Y449, leading to Bcl2 and Bax regulation, accounting for approximately 90% of the survival function. Phosphorylation of Bad required Box1 but not Y449, suggesting that Jak1 also initiates an additional signaling cascade that accounts for approximately 10% of the survival function. Stat5 was activated from the Y449 site but only partially accounted for the survival signal. Proliferation required both Y449 and Box1. Thymocyte development in vivo showed that deletion of Y449 eliminated 90% of αβ T-cell development and completely eliminated γδ T-cell development, whereas deleting Box 1 completely eliminated both αβ and γδ T-cell development. Thus the IL-7 receptor controls at least two distinct pathways, in addition to Stat5, that are required for cell survival.

DISCUSSION

The IL-7R delivers critical signals for lymphocyte development and homeostasis. The current model of this antiapoptotic effect relates to the balance of Bad and Bax versus Bcl2 in mitochondria. In the presence of IL-7, Bcl2 is synthesized, Bax is constrained to cytosol, and Bad is inactivated. Following IL-7 withdrawal, Bcl2 synthesis ceases, Bax translocates to mitochondria, and Bad is dephosphorylated and binds to Bcl2, inactivating it. During the first several hours of IL-7 withdrawal, residual Bcl2 can still function and protect cells from Bax-induced damage. However, when the level of active Bad exceeds the level of Bcl2 and Bax accumulates in mitochondria with increasing time of IL-7 withdrawal, cells begin to die. The importance of the balance of Bcl2/Bax in the IL-7 response has been demonstrated in vivo by experiments showing that the deficiency in T-cell development in IL-7 R −/− mice can be rescued by overexpressing Bcl2 ( 1 , 19 ) or deleting Bax ( 14 ). Introducing activated Bad kills D1 cells, and this was countered by overexpressing Bcl2 (Li et al., submitted).

To begin to identify the signaling pathways that connect the IL-7R with these apoptosis regulators, we sought to determine the critical regions of the intracellular domain of IL-7Rα using the D1 thymocyte cell line, which depends on IL-7 for survival and proliferation. Two small regions of the intracellular domain of IL-7Rα were shown to be critical, Box1 and Y449. The same two regions were also shown to be critical in vivo in thymocyte development, as examined by reconstitution of IL-7Rα −/− stem cells by retrovirus expressing various receptor constructs.

Based on our findings and that of others, we propose the model illustrated in Fig. 13 . IL-7 ligation brings together the intracellular domains of IL-7Rα and -γ c , bearing their associated kinases, Jak1 (associated with Box1) and Jak3, respectively. Jak1 and -3 mutually phosphorylate one another, increasing their kinase activities. Jak1 (or Jak3) then phosphorylates Y449, creating a docking site for a signaling cascade leading to bcl2 induction, Bax cytosolic retention, and cell cycling. Part of the signal from Y449 to bcl2 may be Stat5, but another signal from Y449 is also required to fully activate the bcl2 promoter and to induce cell division. Jak1 (or Jak3) also triggers a Y449-independent pathway leading to Bad phosphorylation, which also promotes cell survival. The Y449 pathway is necessary for most IL-7-induced effects, although our experiments have not proven that it is sufficient.

One candidate for a Y449-induced pathway would be PI3K-AKT which is a well-known mediator of receptor signals for cell survival. In the IL-7 system, the PI3K pathway was previously observed to operate in B cells responding to IL-7R signaling and to depend on Y449 ( 40 ). However PI3K does not appear to be critical for IL-7-induced survival of D1 cells since inhibitors of PI3K did not kill these cells or reduce bcl2 expression, nor did active AKT protect from IL-7 withdrawal (W. Q. Li et al., unpublished data). We have verified that AKT is activated by IL-7 in the D1 T-cell line, but, surprisingly, there was no difference in activation of AKT by chimeric receptors among the deletion mutants (data not shown). Since deletion of the entire intracellular domain of IL-7Rα still retained AKT activation following ligand stimulation, perhaps in these cells the signal to activate PI3K-AKT comes from the γ c chain or possibly from some other receptor that is collaterally activated by the external or transmembrane regions of the IL-7Rα chain. Taking this evidence together, the postulated survival pathway that emanates from Y449 does not appear to be the PI3K-AKT pathway.

Another candidate pathway emanating from Y449 is the Stat5 pathway, which has previously been implicated in IL-7R signaling ( 10 ). However, knockout of the two isoforms of Stat5 did not produce a deficiency in thymic development ( 36 ), indicating that Stat5 is dispensable for IL-7 signaling in vivo. Our findings confirm that Stat5 is activated by the IL-7R in D1 cells but that an activated Stat5 did not confer long-term survival in the absence of IL-7; moreover, a dominant negative Stat5, at least in experiments so far, has not shown an inhibitory effect on survival in the presence of IL-7. Activated Stat5 prolonged the life of D1 cells by a few days in the absence of IL-7 and appeared to sustain expression of bcl2 for about that length of time. The bcl2 promoter does not show an apparent Stat5 consensus binding site, so the effect of Stat5 on the bcl2 gene may be indirect; perhaps IL-7R first induces production of a transcription factor that in turn amplifies the action of other transcription factors that are essential to expression of the bcl2 gene. It is also possible that the stability of bcl2 transcripts is enhanced by a Stat5 signal.

Other Stats, in addition to Stat5, were activated by ligand stimulation of the IL-7R. However, both Stat1 and Stat3 were activated in the absence of Y449, indicating that this is not the docking site for their activation and showing that the significance of Y449 cannot be explained based on docking any of these Stats. Note that the activation of Stat1 and -3 occurs in the absence of any IL-7Rα tyrosines. Unlike Stat5, which apparently docks to phosphorylated Y449 and becomes phosphorylated, Stat1 and -3 are phosphorylated without docking to the IL-7Rα via its own phosphotyrosine. At this time, we do not know how (or if) these Stats associate with the receptor complex. Their phosphorylation requires Box1, which could indicate direct phosphorylation by a Jak or by a kinase downstream of the Jaks. Because they are rapidly phosphorylated (10 min) there would not seem to be enough time to induce synthesis of other cytokines that would act on other receptors that could in turn activate Stat1 and -3.

To identify the critical signaling cascade from the IL-7 receptor, it will be helpful to identify Y449 as a critical residue regulating survival via Bcl2 synthesis and Bax cytosolic retention. Assuming that this residue is phosphorylated following IL-7 binding, future studies will be aimed at identifying the protein, distinct from Stat5, that binds this phosphotyrosine motif.

Several kinases have been proposed to phosphorylate Bad at Ser 112, including AKT, protein kinase A, and Rsk in some cell types ( 8 , 12 , 35 ). However, we found that a PI3K inhibitor could not block Bad phosphorylation at Ser112 in D1 cells (Li et al., submitted). Studies are ongoing to identify the kinase related to the Box1 region which phosphorylates Bad at Ser112.

The development of γδ T cells depends on the IL-7 pathway. Here we show that this development depends on the Box1-Y449 axis. A possible distinction from the αβ T-cell pathway was observed in that, whereas the αβ T-cell pathway could still develop to 10% of normal in the absence of Y449, the development or survival or both of γδ T cells were completely blocked. This could indicate that IL-7 signals more than survival in the γδ pathway and also gives a unique signal for γδ T cells coming from Y449. This would be consistent with the ability of a bcl2 transgene to reconstitute αβ T-cell development, but not γδ T-cell development.
