---
pmid: '19841481'
title: NTE1-encoded phosphatidylcholine phospholipase b regulates transcription of
  phospholipid biosynthetic genes.
authors:
- Fernández-Murray JP
- Gaspard GJ
- Jesch SA
- McMaster CR
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC2794719
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.063958
---

# NTE1-encoded phosphatidylcholine phospholipase b regulates transcription of phospholipid biosynthetic genes.
**Authors:** Fernández-Murray JP, Gaspard GJ, Jesch SA, McMaster CR
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.063958](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.063958)
**PMC:** [PMC2794719](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2794719/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Dec 25;284(52):36034-36046. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.063958.
Epub  2009 Oct 19.

NTE1-encoded phosphatidylcholine phospholipase b regulates transcription of 
phospholipid biosynthetic genes.

Fernández-Murray JP(1), Gaspard GJ(1), Jesch SA(2), McMaster CR(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Atlantic 
Research Centre, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia 
B3H 4H7, Canada.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York 14853.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Atlantic 
Research Centre, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia 
B3H 4H7, Canada. Electronic address: christopher.mcmaster@dal.ca.

The Saccharomyces cerevisiae NTE1 gene encodes an evolutionarily conserved 
phospholipase B localized to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) that degrades 
phosphatidylcholine (PC) generating glycerophosphocholine and free fatty acids. 
We show here that the activity of NTE1-encoded phospholipase B (Nte1p) prevents 
the attenuation of transcription of genes encoding enzymes involved in 
phospholipid synthesis in response to increased rates of PC synthesis by 
affecting the nuclear localization of the transcriptional repressor Opi1p. Nte1p 
activity becomes necessary for cells growing in inositol-free media under 
conditions of high rates of PC synthesis elicited by the presence of choline at 
37 degrees C. The specific choline transporter encoded by the HNM1 gene is 
necessary for the burst of PC synthesis observed at 37 degrees C as follows: (i) 
Nte1p is dispensable in an hnm1Delta strain under these conditions, and (ii) 
there is a 3-fold increase in the rate of choline transport via the Hnm1p 
choline transporter upon a shift to 37 degrees C. Overexpression of NTE1 
alleviated the inositol auxotrophy of a plethora of mutants, including 
scs2Delta, scs3Delta, ire1Delta, and hac1Delta among others. Overexpression of 
NTE1 sustained phospholipid synthesis gene transcription under conditions that 
normally repress transcription. This effect was also observed in a strain 
defective in the activation of free fatty acids for phosphatidic acid synthesis. 
No changes in the levels of phosphatidic acid were detected under conditions of 
altered expression of NTE1. Consistent with a synthetic impairment between 
challenged ER function and inositol deprivation, increased expression of NTE1 
improved the growth of cells exposed to tunicamycin in the absence of inositol. 
We describe a new role for Nte1p toward membrane homeostasis regulating 
phospholipid synthesis gene transcription. We propose that Nte1p activity, by 
controlling PC abundance at the ER, affects lateral membrane packing and that 
this parameter, in turn, impacts the repressing transcriptional activity of 
Opi1p, the main regulator of phospholipid synthesis gene transcription.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.063958
PMCID: PMC2794719
PMID: 19841481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The Saccharomyces cerevisiae NTE1 gene encodes an evolutionarily conserved phospholipase B localized to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) that degrades phosphatidylcholine (PC) generating glycerophosphocholine and free fatty acids. We show here that the activity of NTE1 -encoded phospholipase B (Nte1p) prevents the attenuation of transcription of genes encoding enzymes involved in phospholipid synthesis in response to increased rates of PC synthesis by affecting the nuclear localization of the transcriptional repressor Opi1p. Nte1p activity becomes necessary for cells growing in inositol-free media under conditions of high rates of PC synthesis elicited by the presence of choline at 37 °C. The specific choline transporter encoded by the HNM1 gene is necessary for the burst of PC synthesis observed at 37 °C as follows: (i) Nte1p is dispensable in an hnm1 Δ strain under these conditions, and (ii) there is a 3-fold increase in the rate of choline transport via the Hnm1p choline transporter upon a shift to 37 °C. Overexpression of NTE1 alleviated the inositol auxotrophy of a plethora of mutants, including scs2 Δ, scs3 Δ, ire1 Δ, and hac1 Δ among others. Overexpression of NTE1 sustained phospholipid synthesis gene transcription under conditions that normally repress transcription. This effect was also observed in a strain defective in the activation of free fatty acids for phosphatidic acid synthesis. No changes in the levels of phosphatidic acid were detected under conditions of altered expression of NTE1 . Consistent with a synthetic impairment between challenged ER function and inositol deprivation, increased expression of NTE1 improved the growth of cells exposed to tunicamycin in the absence of inositol. We describe a new role for Nte1p toward membrane homeostasis regulating phospholipid synthesis gene transcription. We propose that Nte1p activity, by controlling PC abundance at the ER, affects lateral membrane packing and that this parameter, in turn, impacts the repressing transcriptional activity of Opi1p, the main regulator of phospholipid synthesis gene transcription.

Introduction

Neuropathy target esterase ( NTE1 ) encodes a phosphatidylcholine (PC) 3 -specific phospholipase B conserved from yeast to man. The Nte1p enzyme catalyzes the deacylation of PC in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) resulting in the production of glycerophosphocholine and two molecules of free fatty acid ( 1 , 2 ) ( Fig. 1 ). In adult animals, the NTE1 -encoded protein is enriched in the brain and was originally described as neuropathy target esterase as its activity is inhibited by organophosphates found in pesticides resulting in chronic neuropathy ( 3 , 4 ). Mutations in the human NTE1 gene cause an autosomal recessive motor neuron disease ( 5 ). Homozygous null mice for NTE1 −/− die at embryonic day 9 ( 6 ). NTE1 +/− heterozygote mice exposed to organophosphates displayed increased levels of hyperactivity compared with wild type animals consistent with a role in regulation of motor activity ( 7 ), whereas neuron-specific inactivation of NTE1 leads to cellular pathology in the hippocampus, thalamus, and cerebellum ( 8 – 10 ). The NTE1 gene of Drosophila (known as swiss cheese ) is not essential for life with homozygous null swiss cheese −/− flies displaying age-dependent neurodegeneration ( 9 , 10 ). Impairment of Nte1p-mediated PC turnover causes abnormal cellular and tissue development in the placenta and central nervous system characterized at the cellular level by intracytoplasmic vacuolation, abnormal ER structures, and multilayered membrane stacks ( 6 , 8 – 10 ).

PC can be turned over via several different lipases beyond the phospholipase B activity encoded by NTE1 . These lipases produce numerous second messengers, including arachidonic acid for the synthesis of prostaglandins and leukotrienes to control inflammatory and immune responses, lysophosphatidylcholine to provide a chemotactic signal for macrophages and lymphocytes, and diacylglycerol for the activation of protein kinases ( 11 – 14 ). Although it is known that the NTE1 -encoded phospholipase B catalyzes the deacylation of PC to produce fatty acids and glycerophosphocholine, its cellular role is not known. We studied Nte1p in Saccharomyces cerevisiae to further our understanding of its cellular function.

Phospholipid metabolism in S. cerevisiae is regulated transcriptionally by a complex network of signals that converge at two transcriptional activators, Ino2p and Ino4p, and a transcriptional repressor, Opi1p ( Fig. 9 A ) ( 15 – 18 ). Opi1p is the main tuning component of this regulatory system. Ino2p and Ino4p form a heterodimer that binds to an upstream-activating sequence (UAS INO ) present in the promoters of genes involved in phospholipid biosynthesis and promotes their transcription. Interaction of Opi1p with Ino2p represses transcription of UAS INO -containing genes. The most highly regulated gene by this circuit is INO1. INO1 encodes inositol-3-phosphate synthase responsible for the conversion of glucose 6-phosphate to inositol 3-phosphate, the rate-limiting step in the synthesis of phosphatidylinositol (PI). Under inositol-deplete conditions, the INO1 gene is highly transcribed, and upon inositol supplementation, transcription of INO1 is attenuated by the activity of Opi1p. Opi1p regulation of transcription of other phospholipid biosynthetic genes containing UAS INO in their promoters takes place in a similar manner to that of INO1, although the rate of repression varies among them ( 15 – 18 ).

It was recently demonstrated that Opi1p is of the class of transcription factors that exist as inactive membrane-bound forms that need to be released from membranes to regulate transcription ( 19 ). This is an emerging theme among transcription factors that regulate membrane lipid composition and includes the sterol regulatory element-binding proteins that normalize transcription of cholesterol and fatty acid biosynthesis genes ( 20 ) and Mga2p and Spt23p that control transcription of the sole fatty acid desaturase encoding gene OLE1 in S. cerevisiae ( 21 ). Opi1p has been demonstrated to bind phosphatidic acid (PA) and the integral ER resident protein Scs2p (VAMP-associated protein) ( 19 , 22 , 23 ). A decrease in PA levels results in the release of Opi1p from membranes promoting its transit to the nucleoplasm where Opi1p interacts with Ino2p and attenuates transcription of UAS INO -containing genes ( Fig. 9 A ). Inositol addition is thought to elicit such a response by increasing the rate of PI synthesis resulting in a drop in PA levels due to a requirement for CDP-diacylglycerol (CDP-DAG) production to support the synthesis of PI ( 19 , 24 ). The addition of choline to the medium exacerbates the repression by Opi1p but has no effect on its own.

PA plays a pivotal role in phospholipid metabolism. In addition to its role through Opi1p for transcriptional regulation of phospholipid synthesis, PA is the central precursor for phospholipid synthesis ( Fig. 1 ). Flux alterations through the different phospholipid pathways induce changes in PA levels that in turn affect transcriptional regulation of UAS INO -containing genes ( 16 , 24 ). The recent characterization of the PAH1 -encoded PA phosphatase and the DGK1 -encoded DAG kinase revealed the role of a PA pool associated with the ER/nuclear compartment in gene transcription regulation and nuclear membrane proliferation ( 25 – 30 ). Interestingly, PAH1 -encoded PA phosphatase was found associated with the promoters of several UAS INO -containing genes in a phosphorylation-dependent manner and was shown to act as a repressor on those genes independent of Opi1p ( 25 , 26 ).

Compelling evidence demonstrates the influence of PC metabolism on transcriptional regulation of UAS INO -containing genes. Yeast strains bearing hypomorphic alleles of genes responsible for the synthesis of phospholipids through the CDP-DAG branch exhibit a conditional overproduction of inositol phenotype that arises from deregulated transcription of the INO1 gene ( 16 , 17 ). This overproduction of inositol phenotype is conditional as it is alleviated when higher rates of PC synthesis through the CDP-choline pathway are produced by choline supplementation. Low flux through the CDP-DAG branch for PC synthesis provokes a build up of PA, preventing Opi1p regulation of UAS INO -containing genes, whereas restoration of PC synthesis by the addition of exogenous choline drags upon the PA pool through DAG consumption and reestablishes normal Opi1p-mediated transcriptional regulation.

In addition to PA, Opi1p interacts with the ER resident protein Scs2p. A yeast strain with an inactivated SCS2 gene is an inositol auxotroph (Ino − ) due to Opi1p losing one of its membrane anchors resulting in the release of Opi1p into the nucleoplasm where it is free to interact with Ino2p and represses INO1 transcription. Consistent with the notion that alterations in PC metabolism impact phospholipid gene transcription is the observation that blocking PC synthesis through the CDP-choline pathway alleviates the Ino − phenotype of scs2 mutants ( 24 , 31 ).

In this study, we demonstrate that Nte1p-mediated PC turnover sustains phospholipid synthesis gene transcription and describe a role for Nte1p generating and maintaining phospholipid heterogeneity. We show that Nte1p impacts on UAS INO -containing gene transcription regulation independently of overall PA levels, and we propose that Opi1p is sensitive to alterations in lateral membrane packing at the ER produced by Nte1p enzymatic activity.
