---
pmid: '11856530'
title: Drosophila Dscam is required for divergent segregation of sister branches and
  suppresses ectopic bifurcation of axons.
authors:
- Wang J
- Zugates CT
- Liang IH
- Lee CH
- Lee T
journal: Neuron
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(02)00570-6
---

# Drosophila Dscam is required for divergent segregation of sister branches and suppresses ectopic bifurcation of axons.
**Authors:** Wang J, Zugates CT, Liang IH, Lee CH, Lee T
**Journal:** Neuron (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0896-6273(02)00570-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0896-6273(02)00570-6)

## Abstract

1. Neuron. 2002 Feb 14;33(4):559-71. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(02)00570-6.

Drosophila Dscam is required for divergent segregation of sister branches and 
suppresses ectopic bifurcation of axons.

Wang J(1), Zugates CT, Liang IH, Lee CH, Lee T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Structural Biology, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 
61801, USA.

Axon bifurcation results in the formation of sister branches, and divergent 
segregation of the sister branches is essential for efficient innervation of 
multiple targets. From a genetic mosaic screen, we find that a lethal mutation 
in the Drosophila Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule (Dscam) specifically 
perturbs segregation of axonal branches in the mushroom bodies. Single axon 
analysis further reveals that Dscam mutant axons generate additional branches, 
which randomly segregate among the available targets. Moreover, when only one 
target remains, branching is suppressed in wild-type axons while Dscam mutant 
axons still form multiple branches at the original bifurcation point. Taken 
together, we conclude that Dscam controls axon branching and guidance such that 
a neuron can innervate multiple targets with minimal branching.

DOI: 10.1016/s0896-6273(02)00570-6
PMID: 11856530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
