---
pmid: '29202461'
title: IL-7-dependent STAT1 activation limits homeostatic CD4+ T cell expansion.
authors:
- Le Saout C
- Luckey MA
- Villarino AV
- Smith M
- Hasley RB
- Myers TG
- Imamichi H
- Park JH
- O'Shea JJ
- Lane HC
- Catalfamo M
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC5752389
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.96228
---

# IL-7-dependent STAT1 activation limits homeostatic CD4+ T cell expansion.
**Authors:** Le Saout C, Luckey MA, Villarino AV, Smith M, Hasley RB, Myers TG, Imamichi H, Park JH, O'Shea JJ, Lane HC, Catalfamo M
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.96228](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.96228)
**PMC:** [PMC5752389](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5752389/)

## Abstract

1. JCI Insight. 2017 Nov 16;2(22):e96228. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.96228. 
eCollection 2017 Nov 16.

IL-7-dependent STAT1 activation limits homeostatic CD4+ T cell expansion.

Le Saout C(1), Luckey MA(2), Villarino AV(3), Smith M(1), Hasley RB(1), Myers 
TG(4), Imamichi H(1), Park JH(2), O'Shea JJ(3), Lane HC(1), Catalfamo M(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)CMRS/Laboratory of Immunoregulation, NIAID.
(2)Experimental Immunology Branch, CCR, NCI.
(3)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, NIAMS, and.
(4)Genomic Technologies Section, Research Technologies Branch, NIAID, NIH, 
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Georgetown University School of 
Medicine, Washington, DC, USA.

IL-7 regulates homeostatic mechanisms that maintain the overall size of the T 
cell pool throughout life. We show that, under steady-state conditions, IL-7 
signaling is principally mediated by activation of signal transducers and 
activators of transcription 5 (STAT5). In contrast, under lymphopenic 
conditions, there is a modulation of STAT1 expression resulting in an 
IL-7-dependent STAT1 and STAT5 activation. Consequently, the IL-7-induced 
transcriptome is altered with enrichment of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs). 
Moreover, STAT1 overexpression was associated with reduced survival in CD4+ T 
cells undergoing lymphopenia-induced proliferation (LIP). We propose a model in 
which T cells undergoing LIP upregulate STAT1 protein, "switching on" an 
alternate IL-7-dependent program. This mechanism could be a physiological 
process to regulate the expansion and size of the CD4+ T cell pool. During HIV 
infection, the virus could exploit this pathway, leading to the homeostatic 
dysregulation of the T cell pools observed in these patients.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.96228
PMCID: PMC5752389
PMID: 29202461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.

## Full Text

Abstract

IL-7 regulates homeostatic mechanisms that maintain the overall size of the T cell pool throughout life. We show that, under steady-state conditions, IL-7 signaling is principally mediated by activation of signal transducers and activators of transcription 5 (STAT5). In contrast, under lymphopenic conditions, there is a modulation of STAT1 expression resulting in an IL-7–dependent STAT1 and STAT5 activation. Consequently, the IL-7–induced transcriptome is altered with enrichment of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs). Moreover, STAT1 overexpression was associated with reduced survival in CD4 + T cells undergoing lymphopenia-induced proliferation (LIP). We propose a model in which T cells undergoing LIP upregulate STAT1 protein, “switching on” an alternate IL-7–dependent program. This mechanism could be a physiological process to regulate the expansion and size of the CD4 + T cell pool. During HIV infection, the virus could exploit this pathway, leading to the homeostatic dysregulation of the T cell pools observed in these patients.

Introduction

T cell homeostasis is a mechanism designed to preserve the diversity of the T cell repertoire throughout life ( 1 , 2 ). This is achieved by balancing survival and proliferation signals provided by T cell receptor (TCR) engagement to self-peptide–MHC complexes and homeostatic cytokines such as IL-7 and IL-15 ( 3 – 8 ). IL-7 is a critical factor for naive CD4 + and CD8 + T cell homeostasis, and in immune deficient hosts, it supports Lymphopenia-induced proliferation (LIP) ( 9 , 10 ). In these conditions, CD8 + T cells undergo greater proliferation than CD4 + T cells, leading to the hypothesis that these 2 pools may have distinct sensitivity to homeostatic cytokines, and/or intrinsic features of these pools may contribute to explain these differences ( 11 , 12 ).

In human lymphopenic conditions such as HIV infection and BM transplants, there is an increased availability of IL-7 ( 13 – 15 ). Particularly, in patients with HIV infection, the CD4 + T cell pool is under constant homeostatic pressure because of its depletion. This effect is evident by the negative correlation between the rate of proliferating CD4 + T cells and CD4 + T cell counts. A similar relationship is observed in healthy volunteers ( 16 ). In contrast, such a correlation is not observed in the CD8 + T cell pool from patients and healthy volunteers. In patients with HIV infection, following combination antiretroviral therapy (cART), the CD4 + T cell reconstitution is slow and could take many years, depending on the CD4 + T cell number prior to initiation of therapy ( 17 – 19 ). Together, these observations suggest that CD4 + and CD8 + T cell pools are differentially regulated and these characteristics may be exploited by HIV, contributing to the dysregulation of the T cell pools observed in these patients ( 16 , 20 – 24 ).

IL-7 signals through a heterodimer receptor composed of the IL-7Rα and the γc chains, which are respectively associated to Janus kinase-1 (JAK1) and JAK3 ( 25 , 26 ). Binding of IL-7 to its heterodimer receptor leads to transphosphorylation of JAK1 and JAK3. The phosphorylated active form of JAK3 then phosphorylates tyrosine 449 on IL-7Rα, generating a docking site for the signal transducers and activators of transcription 5 (STAT5). The phosphorylated heterodimers STAT5a and STAT5b translocate to the nucleus and initiate transcription of target genes ( 27 – 29 ). In addition to the JAK/STAT pathway, IL-7/IL-7R signaling induces activation of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI[3]K)/AKT pathway ( 30 , 31 ).

In this study, we present evidence that, in T cells undergoing LIP, IL-7 modulates the expression levels of STAT1 protein, resulting in IL-7–dependent STAT1 and STAT5 signaling. We undertook this study to understand the contribution of IL-7–dependent STAT1 activation on T cell homeostasis in the setting of lymphopenia. Further, we identified the potential involvement of this pathway in the dysregulation of the T cells pools observed in HIV-infected patients.

Discussion

In the present manuscript, we describe that, in steady-state conditions, IL-7 signaling regulates a set of STAT1/IFN-associated mRNA transcripts, which are enriched in conditions of increased STAT1 expression, such as lymphopenia. In addition, overexpression of STAT1 limits CD4 + T cell reconstitution. Our data suggest a model in which T cells undergoing LIP upregulate expression of STAT1, “switching on” an IL-7–dependent STAT1/STAT5 activation that could regulate CD4 + T cell expansion. This mechanism could be a physiological mechanism to regulate the expansion and the size of the CD4 + T cell pool under lymphopenic conditions.

It has been described that IL-7/IL-7R signaling can activate — in addition to STAT5 — STAT1 and STAT3, but the function of IL-7-dependent activation of these transcription factors are largely unknown ( 34 – 36 ). In the present manuscript, we present evidence of the contribution of IL-7–dependent STAT1 activation limiting the expansion of the CD4 + T cell pool. T cell homeostasis is a mechanism designed to maintain a relatively constant size and repertoire of the T cell pools throughout life. This is achieved by slow proliferation of T cells in the periphery mediated by IL-7 ( 11 ). In contrast, in lymphopenic hosts, adoptively transferred T cells undergo a robust proliferation in which CD4 + T cells show a slower proliferation than that observed in CD8 + T cells ( 11 ). Similarly, under clinic settings of lymphopenia, such as extensive chemotherapy and BM transplant, CD4 + T cell reconstitution is slow and can take more than a year to achieve full reconstitution. Distinct reconstitution is observed in the CD8 + T cell pool in which cells undergo a profound proliferation accompanied by accumulation of cells with an activated memory-like phenotype ( 13 – 15 , 17 , 40 ). This reconstitution profile is also observed in patients with HIV infection in whom complete CD4 + T cell reconstitution following cART therapy is a slow process that typically requires many years and depends on the CD4 + T cell number prior to therapy and other factors ( 17 – 19 ). In the HIV infection, CD8 + T cell numbers are already expanded, and the CD8 + T cell pool does not seem to be influenced by the degree of CD4 + T cell depletion. Moreover, while the CD8 + T cell pool shows great expansion potential, the CD4 + T cell pool seems to be highly regulated in their capacity for expansion ( 16 , 24 ). Previously, we had shown that, in HIV-infected patients, the immune activation of naive CD4 + T cells (measured as proliferation) is mainly driven by CD4 + T cell depletion. In contrast, the immune activation of the memory CD4 + T cells is driven by a combination of homeostatic forces (CD4 counts) and viral replication, and both subsets showed increased mRNA expression of transcripts associated with γc cytokines and type I IFNs ( 24 ). HIV-infected patients showed increased expression of t-STAT1, suggesting that IL-7 signaling in CD4 + T cells undergoing homeostatic proliferation may be driven by activation of STAT1 and STAT5. These pathways could contribute to the slow recovery of the CD4 + T cell pool following cART ( 37 , 24 ). The direct cytopathic effect of HIV plays an important role, although it does not completely explain the depletion of the CD4 + T cell pool. We have shown that, in the context of lymphopenia, IL-7 drives increased expression of STAT1, enhancing the response to type I IFNs. In addition, in the setting of chronic exposure to type I IFNs, this mechanism led to the preferential depletion of the CD4 effector memory phenotype ( 37 ). The present data suggest that HIV alters T cell homeostasis and cytokine responses, leading to the depletion of the CD4 + T cell pool.

Together, these observations suggest that factors directly and indirectly associated with the virus contribute to the activation and depletion of the CD4 + T cell pool in these patients. More studies should be directed to address the mechanism of IL-7–dependent upregulation of STAT1. Blockade of STAT1 upregulation may promote greater and faster reconstitution of the CD4 + T cell pool following cART. In addition, it has been shown that homeostatic proliferation participates in the establishment and maintenance of cells harboring HIV provirus ( 41 , 42 ). Therefore, it would be important to consider the potential impact of blocking STAT1-dependent IL-7 signaling on the viral reservoir. The present data suggest a potential mechanism to the observations that suggest that the CD4 + and CD8 + T cell pools may respond differentially to a lymphopenic environment, and/or they possess a distinct homeostatic regulatory mechanism that may explain these differences. While the CD4 + T cell pool is highly regulated in size, CD8 + T cells can undergo greater expansions.

We found that, under steady-state conditions, in vitro stimulation with IL-7 can induce mRNA transcripts associated to STAT1/IFN in naive WT T cells, and these genes were enriched in T cells overexpressing STAT1. We showed that, while IL-7 promotes proliferation and survival of T cells, it also showed proapoptotic potential ( Supplemental Figure 4D , Table 3 , Table 4 , Supplemental Table 6 , and Supplemental Table 8 ). Recent reports had shown that IL-7 in vitro and in vivo in T cells undergoing homeostatic proliferation induces secretion of IFN-γ ( 43 ). Continuous IL-7 signaling leads to an IFN-γ–dependent induced cell death in CD8 + T cells ( 44 ). This pathway may contribute to the homeostasis of the CD4 + T cell pool by increasing STAT1 expression and generating a positive loop of transcription of STAT1 and its associated genes. However, overexpression of STAT1 on T cells undergoing LIP did not lead to increased secretion of IFN-γ, nor to an enhanced responsiveness to in vitro stimulation with IFN-γ. Moreover, recent reports had shown that STAT1 can affect survival and proliferation in T cells, and this effect is partially independent of IFN-γ signaling ( 45 ). These data and our observations suggest that STAT1 may be involved in balancing proliferation and anti- and proapoptotic signals during lymphopenia. In addition, IL-7 signaling activates the PI3K/AKT pathway, which constitutes a critical signal for survival and proliferation ( 11 ). Cytokines such as type I IFNs can regulate the AKT pathway in T cells and mediate antiproliferative effects. Whether IL-7–dependent STAT1 activation regulates AKT pathway needs further investigation ( 46 ). Our model suggests that CD4 + T cell expansion in cells undergoing LIP is regulated by an IL-7–dependent signaling composed by activation of STAT1 and STAT5, and this mechanism limits the expansion of the CD4 + T cell pool.

The transcription of STAT1/IFN-associated genes may also reflect other potential properties of IL-7 ( 47 , 48 ). Recently, we have described that IL-7 can potentiate the responsiveness of T cells to type I IFNs by modulating the expression levels of STAT1 ( 37 ). In the present study, we found that IL-7 induces in STAT1 Tg T cells mRNA transcripts of IFN-inducible GTPases, such as those that belong to the GBP and IRG protein families. Particularly, the members of the IRG family have been involved in immunity against pathogens; however, emerging data suggest that they may also play a role in T cell homeostasis ( 49 ). Together, these observations suggest that IL-7 may play a role in immunity against pathogens modulating its own signaling and that of other cytokines.

In the present manuscript, we describe a pathway in which IL-7 can modulate its own signaling. IL-7 can regulate the expression levels of STAT1, “turning on” an IL-7–dependent STAT1 activation in addition to STAT5, controlling the expansion of the CD4 + T cell pool under lymphopenic conditions. In chronic HIV infection, the mechanisms behind the steady decline of the CD4 + T cells are not very well understood, and the direct cytopathic effect of the virus does not explain this outcome. HIV may take advantage of this physiological pathway, causing the immune dysregulation of the CD4 + and CD8 + T cell pools observed in these patients. Therapeutic strategies targeting this pathway may enhance T cell reconstitution in the clinical settings of lymphopenia.
