---
pmid: '16306601'
title: Respiratory syncytial virus-inducible BCL-3 expression antagonizes the STAT/IRF
  and NF-kappaB signaling pathways by inducing histone deacetylase 1 recruitment to
  the interleukin-8 promoter.
authors:
- Jamaluddin M
- Choudhary S
- Wang S
- Casola A
- Huda R
- Garofalo RP
- Ray S
- Brasier AR
journal: J Virol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC1316019
doi: 10.1128/JVI.79.24.15302-15313.2005
---

# Respiratory syncytial virus-inducible BCL-3 expression antagonizes the STAT/IRF and NF-kappaB signaling pathways by inducing histone deacetylase 1 recruitment to the interleukin-8 promoter.
**Authors:** Jamaluddin M, Choudhary S, Wang S, Casola A, Huda R, Garofalo RP, Ray S, Brasier AR
**Journal:** J Virol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.79.24.15302-15313.2005](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.79.24.15302-15313.2005)
**PMC:** [PMC1316019](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1316019/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2005 Dec;79(24):15302-13. doi: 10.1128/JVI.79.24.15302-15313.2005.

Respiratory syncytial virus-inducible BCL-3 expression antagonizes the STAT/IRF 
and NF-kappaB signaling pathways by inducing histone deacetylase 1 recruitment 
to the interleukin-8 promoter.

Jamaluddin M(1), Choudhary S, Wang S, Casola A, Huda R, Garofalo RP, Ray S, 
Brasier AR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, MRB 8.138, The University of Texas Medical Branch, 
301 University Blvd., Galveston, TX 77555-1060, USA.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a paramyxovirus that produces airway 
inflammation, in part by inducing interleukin-8 (IL-8) expression, a CXC-type 
chemokine, via the NF-kappaB/RelA and STAT/IRF signaling pathways. In 
RSV-infected A549 cells, IL-8 transcription attenuates after 24 h in spite of 
ongoing viral replication and persistence of nuclear RelA, suggesting a 
mechanism for transcriptional attenuation. RSV infection induces B-cell lymphoma 
protein -3 (Bcl-3) expression 6 to 12 h after viral infection, at times when 
IL-8 transcription is inhibited. By contrast, 293 cells, deficient in inducible 
Bcl-3 expression, show no attenuation of IL-8 transcription. We therefore 
examined Bcl-3's role in terminating virus-inducible IL-8 transcription. 
Transient expression of Bcl-3 potently inhibited virus-inducible IL-8 
transcription by disrupting both the NF-kappaB and STAT/IRF pathways. Although 
previously Bcl-3 was thought to capture 50-kDa NF-kappaB1 isoforms in the 
cytoplasm, immunoprecipitation (IP) and electrophoretic mobility shift assays 
indicate that nuclear Bcl-3 associates with NF-kappaB1 without affecting DNA 
binding. Additionally, Bcl-3 potently inhibited the STAT/IRF pathway. 
Nondenaturing co-IP assays indicate that nuclear Bcl-3 associates with STAT-1 
and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC-1), increasing HDAC-1 recruitment to the IL-8 
promoter. Treatment with the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A blocks attenuation of 
IL-8 transcription. A nuclear targeting-deficient Bcl-3 is unable to enhance 
HDAC-1-mediated chemokine repression. Finally, small inhibitory RNA-mediated 
Bcl-3 "knockdown" resulted in enhanced RSV-induced chemokine expression in A549 
cells. These data indicate that Bcl-3 is a virus-inducible inhibitor of 
chemokine transcription by interfering with the NF-kappaB and STAT/IRF signaling 
pathways by complexing with them and recruiting HDAC-1 to attenuate target 
promoter activity.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.24.15302-15313.2005
PMCID: PMC1316019
PMID: 16306601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a paramyxovirus that produces airway inflammation, in part by inducing interleukin-8 (IL-8) expression, a CXC-type chemokine, via the NF-κB/RelA and STAT/IRF signaling pathways. In RSV-infected A549 cells, IL-8 transcription attenuates after 24 h in spite of ongoing viral replication and persistence of nuclear RelA, suggesting a mechanism for transcriptional attenuation. RSV infection induces B-cell lymphoma protein -3 (Bcl-3) expression 6 to 12 h after viral infection, at times when IL-8 transcription is inhibited. By contrast, 293 cells, deficient in inducible Bcl-3 expression, show no attenuation of IL-8 transcription. We therefore examined Bcl-3's role in terminating virus-inducible IL-8 transcription. Transient expression of Bcl-3 potently inhibited virus-inducible IL-8 transcription by disrupting both the NF-κB and STAT/IRF pathways. Although previously Bcl-3 was thought to capture 50-kDa NF-κB1 isoforms in the cytoplasm, immunoprecipitation (IP) and electrophoretic mobility shift assays indicate that nuclear Bcl-3 associates with NF-κB1 without affecting DNA binding. Additionally, Bcl-3 potently inhibited the STAT/IRF pathway. Nondenaturing co-IP assays indicate that nuclear Bcl-3 associates with STAT-1 and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC-1), increasing HDAC-1 recruitment to the IL-8 promoter. Treatment with the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A blocks attenuation of IL-8 transcription. A nuclear targeting-deficient Bcl-3 is unable to enhance HDAC-1-mediated chemokine repression. Finally, small inhibitory RNA-mediated Bcl-3 “knockdown” resulted in enhanced RSV-induced chemokine expression in A549 cells. These data indicate that Bcl-3 is a virus-inducible inhibitor of chemokine transcription by interfering with the NF-κB and STAT/IRF signaling pathways by complexing with them and recruiting HDAC-1 to attenuate target promoter activity.

RESULTS

Previously we have shown that RSV induces IL-8 expression in alveolar type II-like epithelial cells through an NF-κB-dependent mechanism, because inhibition of the canonical NF-κB pathway completely blocks IL-8 expression and mutation of the NF-κB binding site renders the promoter inert to RSV-induced activation ( 17 , 51 ). We have found RSV infection of A549 cells results in a transient transcriptional induction, with a ∼15-fold enhancement of hIL-8/LUC promoter activity by 15 h (relative to zero h) and falls thereafter, with a ∼50% reduction (relative to 15 h) by 24 h and a further decrease by 36 h (Fig. 1A ). The mechanism underlying the decline in IL-8 transcription is unexplained because NF-κB RelA is abundantly present in the nucleus (Fig. 1A , inset), NF-κB binding activity is increasing between 12 and 24 h after viral infection ( 51 ), and the major IκB family members (IκBα and -β) are undetectable at these time points ( 23 ). Since we have shown that the ankyrin repeat-containing Bcl-3 is involved in modulating NF-κB1 abundance in TNF-stimulated hepatic cells ( 7 ), we asked whether Bcl-3 was virus inducible and whether it may play a role in the transcriptional attenuation. A549 cells harvested at various times after RSV infection were fractionated into cytoplasmic and sucrose cushion-purified nuclear extracts and assayed for steady-state changes in Bcl-3 protein abundance by Western blotting. In control A549 cells, a specific ∼56-kDa Bcl-3 band was identified to be of equal relative abundance (optical density at 595 nm of Bcl-3 signal/μg protein) in both cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions (Fig. 1B ). Although Bcl-3 was thought to be a nuclear protein in B cells ( 61 ), we have previously shown that Bcl-3 is also a cytoplasmic protein in epithelial cells ( 7 ). Northern blotting for Bcl-3 transcript showed RSV-induced expression of a single 1.8-kb transcript to 3.2-fold, 3 and 6 h after RSV infection, indicating RSV-induced Bcl-3 expression through enhanced gene expression (data not shown).

We then compared Bcl-3 protein expression in control and RSV-infected human embryonic kidney cells (293 cells). As seen in Fig. 1C , relative to A549, the endogenous Bcl-3 levels are low in 293 cells and are not further up-regulated by RSV infection, indicating 293 cells are relatively Bcl-3 deficient. To suggest whether Bcl-3 expression may be involved in the phenomenon of transcriptional inhibition, we measured the IL-8 transcriptional profile in 293 cells in response to RSV infection. Surprisingly, we found that in contrast to the biphasic behavior of A549 cells, RSV infection induced hIL-8/LUC activity in a monotonically increasing pattern over 36 h, without attenuation (Fig. 1D ). This finding identified a Bcl-3-deficient cell line to examine its effects on virus-inducible gene expression and suggested that Bcl-3 may be involved in transcriptional attenuation of NF-κB-dependent gene expression.

DISCUSSION

In severe lower respiratory tract infections with RSV, RSV replication initiates mononuclear leukocytes, neutrophils, and eosinophils to be recruited into the lower respiratory tract. In isolated airway epithelial cells, RSV is a potent inducer of chemokine expression by a complex transcriptional control mechanism involving common nuclear factors, NF-κB, AP-1, and the IRF pathway. These factors work in concert to activate IL-8 gene expression by participating in a multiprotein complex termed the enhanceosome ( 9 , 49 ). Although the control mechanisms governing the initial activation pathways of both the NF-κB and STAT transcription factors have been the focus of much study, it is clear that their activity is actively terminated through poorly understood mechanisms. Although the NF-κB-IκB autoregulatory loop appears to control NF-κB's nuclear action in response to cytokine and PMA stimulation in a number of cell types ( 7 , 20 , 47 ), this pathway does not account for attenuation of NF-κB in virally infected epithelial cells, because IκBα is undetectable after its initial proteolysis and is not resynthesized ( 23 ). In addition, attenuation of STAT transcriptional activity has largely focused on the SOCS and PIAS inhibitors (reviewed in references 2 and 57 ). In this study, we examined the role of the Bcl-3 protein in terminating chemokine expression. Bcl-3 is rapidly induced in RSV-infected airway cells in both the cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments of RSV-infected A549 cells, where it associates with NF-κB and inhibits its activity. Our previous work showed that Bcl-3 induction is mediated through the effect of NF-κB action ( 7 ), and it is therefore likely that Bcl-3 induction is not specific to RSV infection but may be general to all NF-κB-activating viruses. Although this work is confirmatory in indicating that Bcl-3 is an antagonist of NF-κB-dependent binding and transcription ( 24 , 58 ), we have made the surprising observation that Bcl-3 is a potent inhibitor of the STAT/IRF pathway. Expression of Bcl-3 in a Bcl-3-deficient cell line blocks virus-inducible expression of IRF-1; this effect appears to be partly mediated through a STAT regulatory element as a result of Bcl-3 complexing with STAT-1. In addition, nuclear Bcl-3 complexes with HDAC-1 enhancing its recruitment to target genes binding NF-κB and STAT. We have shown that the late-phase attenuation of chemokine transcription is partially inhibited by the HDAC inhibitor TSA and, finally, down-regulation of endogenous Bcl-3 up-regulates chemokine expression in RSV-infected cells. These studies suggest that inducible Bcl-3 functions in a pleiotropic mechanism terminating virus-inducible chemokine transcription by antagonizing both the NF-κB and STAT/IRF pathways, as schematically shown in Fig. 8 .
