---
pmid: '12773576'
title: A novel jmjC domain protein modulates heterochromatization in fission yeast.
authors:
- Ayoub N
- Noma K
- Isaac S
- Kahan T
- Grewal SI
- Cohen A
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC156127
doi: 10.1128/MCB.23.12.4356-4370.2003
---

# A novel jmjC domain protein modulates heterochromatization in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Ayoub N, Noma K, Isaac S, Kahan T, Grewal SI, Cohen A
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.23.12.4356-4370.2003](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.23.12.4356-4370.2003)
**PMC:** [PMC156127](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC156127/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jun;23(12):4356-70. doi: 10.1128/MCB.23.12.4356-4370.2003.

A novel jmjC domain protein modulates heterochromatization in fission yeast.

Ayoub N(1), Noma K, Isaac S, Kahan T, Grewal SI, Cohen A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical 
School, Jerusalem, Israel 91010.

The heterochromatin domain at the mat locus of Schizosaccharomyces pombe is 
bounded by the IR-L and IR-R barriers. A genetic screen for mutations that 
promote silencing beyond IR-L revealed a novel gene named epe1, encoding a 
conserved nuclear protein with a jmjC domain. Disruption of epe1 promotes 
continuous spreading of heterochromatin-associated histone modifications and 
Swi6 binding to chromatin across heterochromatic barriers. It also enhances 
position effect variegation at heterochromatic domains, suppresses mutations in 
silencing genes, and stabilizes the repressed epigenetic state at the mat locus. 
However, it does not enhance silencing establishment. Our analysis suggests that 
the jmjC domain is essential for Epe1 activity and that Epe1 counteracts 
transcriptional silencing by negatively affecting heterochromatin stability. 
Consistent with this proposition, the meiotic stability of established 
heterochromatin beyond IR-L is diminished by Epe1 activity, and overexpression 
of Epe1 disrupts heterochromatin through acetylation of H3-K9 and H3-K14 and 
methylation of H3-K4. Furthermore, overexpression of Epe1 elevates the rate of 
chromosome loss. We propose that Epe1 helps control chromatin organization by 
down-regulating the stability of epigenetic marks that govern 
heterochromatization.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.23.12.4356-4370.2003
PMCID: PMC156127
PMID: 12773576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The heterochromatin domain at the mat locus of Schizosaccharomyces pombe is bounded by the IR-L and IR-R barriers. A genetic screen for mutations that promote silencing beyond IR-L revealed a novel gene named epe1 , encoding a conserved nuclear protein with a jmjC domain. Disruption of epe1 promotes continuous spreading of heterochromatin-associated histone modifications and Swi6 binding to chromatin across heterochromatic barriers. It also enhances position effect variegation at heterochromatic domains, suppresses mutations in silencing genes, and stabilizes the repressed epigenetic state at the mat locus. However, it does not enhance silencing establishment. Our analysis suggests that the jmjC domain is essential for Epe1 activity and that Epe1 counteracts transcriptional silencing by negatively affecting heterochromatin stability. Consistent with this proposition, the meiotic stability of established heterochromatin beyond IR-L is diminished by Epe1 activity, and overexpression of Epe1 disrupts heterochromatin through acetylation of H3-K9 and H3-K14 and methylation of H3-K4. Furthermore, overexpression of Epe1 elevates the rate of chromosome loss. We propose that Epe1 helps control chromatin organization by down-regulating the stability of epigenetic marks that govern heterochromatization.

DISCUSSION

By screening for mutations that promote silencing propagation across a heterochromatin barrier, we identified a novel gene, epe1 , that encodes a phylogenetically conserved nuclear protein containing a jmjC domain. Inactivation of Epe1 enhances heterochromatization and suppresses mutations in silencing genes. Conversely, overexpression of Epe1 disrupts heterochromatin organization and centromere function. The effect of epe1 genotype on the frequency of epitype switching in the K Δ:: ade6 + background and on the meiotic stability of a repressed state beyond the IR-L barrier suggests that Epe1 negatively controls heterochromatin stability. The results of complementation experiments indicate that the jmjC domain is essential for Epe1 activity.
