---
pmid: '22056777'
title: Cdk1 promotes kinetochore bi-orientation and regulates Cdc20 expression during
  recovery from spindle checkpoint arrest.
authors:
- Liang H
- Lim HH
- Venkitaraman A
- Surana U
journal: EMBO J
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3261552
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.385
---

# Cdk1 promotes kinetochore bi-orientation and regulates Cdc20 expression during recovery from spindle checkpoint arrest.
**Authors:** Liang H, Lim HH, Venkitaraman A, Surana U
**Journal:** EMBO J (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2011.385](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2011.385)
**PMC:** [PMC3261552](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3261552/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2012 Jan 18;31(2):403-16. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.385. Epub 2011 Nov
4.

Cdk1 promotes kinetochore bi-orientation and regulates Cdc20 expression during 
recovery from spindle checkpoint arrest.

Liang H(1), Lim HH, Venkitaraman A, Surana U.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A STAR (Agency for Science 
Technology and Research), Singapore.

The spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC), an evolutionarily conserved surveillance 
pathway, prevents chromosome segregation in response to conditions that disrupt 
the kinetochore-microtubule attachment. Removal of the checkpoint-activating 
stimulus initiates recovery during which spindle integrity is restored, 
kinetochores become bi-oriented, and cells initiate anaphase. Whether recovery 
ensues passively after the removal of checkpoint stimulus, or requires mediation 
by specific effectors remains uncertain. Here, we report two unrecognized 
functions of yeast Cdk1 required for efficient recovery from SAC-induced arrest. 
We show that Cdk1 promotes kinetochore bi-orientation during recovery by 
restraining premature spindle elongation thereby extinguishing SAC signalling. 
Moreover, Cdk1 is essential for sustaining the expression of Cdc20, an activator 
of the anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) required for anaphase 
progression. We suggest a model in which Cdk1 activity promotes recovery from 
SAC-induced mitotic arrest by regulating bi-orientation and APC/C activity. Our 
findings provide fresh insights into the regulation of mitosis and have 
implications for the therapeutic efficacy of anti-mitotic drugs.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.385
PMCID: PMC3261552
PMID: 22056777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

The spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC), an evolutionarily conserved surveillance pathway, prevents chromosome segregation in response to conditions that disrupt the kinetochore-microtubule attachment. Removal of the checkpoint-activating stimulus initiates recovery during which spindle integrity is restored, kinetochores become bi-oriented, and cells initiate anaphase. Whether recovery ensues passively after the removal of checkpoint stimulus, or requires mediation by specific effectors remains uncertain. Here, we report two unrecognized functions of yeast Cdk1 required for efficient recovery from SAC-induced arrest. We show that Cdk1 promotes kinetochore bi-orientation during recovery by restraining premature spindle elongation thereby extinguishing SAC signalling. Moreover, Cdk1 is essential for sustaining the expression of Cdc20, an activator of the anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) required for anaphase progression. We suggest a model in which Cdk1 activity promotes recovery from SAC-induced mitotic arrest by regulating bi-orientation and APC/C activity. Our findings provide fresh insights into the regulation of mitosis and have implications for the therapeutic efficacy of anti-mitotic drugs.

Introduction

Establishment of kinetochore bi-orientation (also called amphitelic or bi-polar attachment) is critical for chromosome segregation during mitosis, so much so that failure of a single chromosome to attain bi-orientation brings cell-cycle progression to a grinding halt in metaphase ( Li and Nicklaus, 1995 ; Kline-Smith et al, 2005 ). The cell-cycle arrest in response to unattached kinetochores is imposed by the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) ensuring that anaphase is not initiated until all chromosomes are appropriately attached to the spindle ( Amon, 1999 ).

In budding yeast, the SAC signalling network involves highly conserved proteins Mad1, Mad2, Mad3 (orthologues of human Mad1, Mad2 and BubR1, respectively), Bub1, Bub3 (orthologues of human Bub1 and Bub3), Mps1 (orthologue of human Mps1) and Ipl1 (orthologue of human aurora B kinase) ( Musacchio and Salmon, 2007 ). Bi-orientation defects are detected by sensor kinases, Ipl1, Mps1 and Bub1 ( Weiss and Winey, 1996 ; Farr and Hoyt, 1998 ; Biggins and Murray, 2001 ). Activation of these kinases results in rapid recruitment and phosphorylation of downstream effectors such as Bub3, Mad1, Mad2 and Mad3. These proteins assemble into complexes at the unattached kinetochore and inhibit anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) Cdc20 . Consequently, the targets of APC/C Cdc20 , such as securin (Pds1 in yeast) and Cyclin B (Clbs in yeast), are stabilized, sister chromatids remain tethered by cohesins and cells arrest in metaphase with unsegregated chromosomes and high Cdk1 activity ( Li and Cai, 1997 ; D'Angiolella et al, 2003 ). Interestingly, SAC activation also promotes turnover of Cdc20, leading to lower Cdc20 levels ( Pan and Chen, 2004 ; Nilsson et al, 2008 ), ensuring that checkpoint-imposed arrest is not overridden by Cdc20 hyperaccumulation. During the normal cycle, Cdc20 is regulated both at the transcriptional level and by proteolytic degradation. While CDC20 gene is expressed in a cell cycle-dependent manner and is driven by a hybrid promoter with Yox1-, Mcm1- and Fkh-binding sites ( Zhu et al, 2000 ; Darieva et al, 2010 ), Cdc20 protein is subjected to proteolytic degradation throughout the cell cycle ( Prinz et al, 1998 ). Thus, both the transcriptional regulation and proteolytic degradation are relevant to the maintenance of Cdc20 levels during SAC-induced mitotic arrest. But how these processes are regulated remains unclear.

Once the checkpoint stimulus is removed, cells must extinguish SAC signalling, establish bi-orientation and initiate anaphase. Studies in mammalian cells suggest that SAC signalling is actively silenced by specific mechanisms rather than by passive dissipation of the upstream signals once bi-orientation has been achieved ( Howell et al, 2001 ; Wassmann et al, 2003 ). For instance, p31 (comet) as well as mechanisms involving Cdc20 ubiquitylation have been implicated in the reversal of Cdc20 inhibition by Mad2 ( Xia et al, 2004 ; Reddy et al, 2007 ). While inactivation of the SAC is clearly central to the initiation of recovery, maintenance of the cellular context permissive for silencing of the checkpoint is equally critical. Treatment with the microtubule poison nocodazole, for instance, causes disassembly of mitotic spindle, disrupts kinetochore-microtubule attachment and results in SAC activation. During the arrest, cells must maintain cellular conditions that are conducive to rapid spindle assembly and the establishment of bi-orientation to ensure efficient recovery once nocodazole is removed. However, the cellular requirements for a rapid return to normalcy from SAC-induced arrest remain poorly understood.

The involvement of Cdk1 kinase activity in the maintenance of SAC-induced arrest has been previously documented ( Li and Cai, 1997 ; D'Angiolella et al, 2003 ). However, it remains unknown whether there is any specific requirement for high Cdk1 activity in establishing the cellular context permissive for recovery from SAC arrest. In this study, we have uncovered two important functions for Cdk1 activity that facilitate recovery from SAC-induced arrest: (i) coordination of bi-orientation and spindle extension when the mitotic spindle is prone to premature extension due to high levels of elongation-conducive proteins Ase1 and Cin8 (ii) maintenance of the cellular levels of APC/C activator Cdc20 through transcription regulation. Failure to fulfill these requirements in the absence of Cdk1 activity makes it virtually impossible for cells to recover from SAC-induced arrest and resume cell-cycle progression.

Discussion

High Cdk1 activity is a conspicuous feature of cells arrested in response to SAC activation. It has been suggested that the high Cdk1 activity is required for the maintenance of SAC-imposed arrest ( Li and Cai, 1997 ; D'Angiolella et al, 2003 ). However, in this study we show that high Cdk1 activity in SAC-arrested cells is also necessary for efficient recovery, via two previously unrecognized mechanisms: (i) efficient re-establishment of kinetochore bi-orientation once the bi-polar spindles have been assembled after nocodazole removal (ii) maintenance of adequate levels of Cdc20 protein, critical for the dissolution of sister-chromatid cohesion following SAC silencing. The requirement of high Cdk1 activity for the establishment of bi-orientation appears to be specific to the recovery from SAC-induced metaphase arrest since high Cdk1 activity is dispensable for kinetochore bi-orientation normally established in late S phase ( Figure 2B ; Supplementary Figure S4 ). However, the involvement of Cdk1 in the maintenance of Cdc20 levels is mediated via effectors regulating Cdc20 expression during the unperturbed division cycle. Thus, we suggest that cells utilize a combination of context-specific and general mechanisms to establish the cellular conditions most conducive to mounting an efficient recovery from SAC arrest.

Our results suggest that the absence of Cdk1 activity during recovery causes premature extension of the mitotic spindle resulting in an inability to establish kinetochore bi-orientation efficiently ( Figure 3 ). This is consistent with the suggestion from a previous study that short spindles may be conducive to bi-orientation ( Liu et al, 2008 ). Thus, high Cdk1 activity is necessary to restrain spindle extension during recovery from SAC-induced arrest. Premature spindle elongation in cells deficient in Cdk1 activity, lack of Ase1 phosphorylation ( Figure 4D ) and inhibition of premature spindle elongation by ase1-7D in Cdk1-deficient cells ( Figure 5B and D ) imply that Cdk1 prevents untimely spindle extension by dampening Ase1 activity via phosphorylation. Since Ase1 is involved in Cin8 recruitment to the spindle mid-zone and Ase1 phosphorylation by Cdk1 reduces its ability to recruit Cin8 ( Khmelinskii et al, 2007 , 2009 ), insufficient Ase1 phosphorylation in the absence of Cdk1 activity ( Figure 4D ) can result in enhanced recruitment of proteins such as Cin8 to the spindle mid-zone. This would result in a much higher rate of spindle extension, severely compromising the efficiency of bi-orientation. However, bi-orientation is not dependent on the high Cdk1 activity in S phase, since low levels of motor proteins (Cin8 and Ase1) preclude the need for Cdk1-mediated phosphorylation to maintain a short spindle ( Supplementary Figure S4 ). This is consistent with our observation that overexpression of Cin8 during S phase results in premature spindle elongation and delays bi-orientation ( Supplementary Figure S4 ). Taken together, these results underscore the importance of high Cdk1 kinase activity in cells recovering from SAC-induced arrest and suggest a mechanism wherein Cdk1 promotes re-establishment of kinetochore bi-orientation and extinction of the SAC.

Our conclusion that mitotic spindle undergoes premature elongation in cells recovering from SAC-induced arrest in the absence of Cdk1 kinase activity appears to contradict a previous study ( Rahal and Amon, 2008 ), suggesting that Cdk1/Clb is required for spindle elongation in normal anaphase, although the exact mechanism underlying this requirement remains unclear. Our investigations are set in the context of recovery from SAC arrest, specifically within a time period when cells have assembled a bi-polar spindle but have not established kinetochore bi-orientation. Therefore, while Cdk1 may have a role in spindle elongation during anaphase in normal cycle, our results suggest that Cdk1 activity is critical for restraining premature spindle extension to allow kinetochore bi-orientation during cells' recovery from SAC-induced arrest. Recently, Cdc2/Cdc13 (Cdk1/CycB) is reported to have a role in kinetochore bi-orientation in fission yeast via phosphorylation of chromosome passenger complex component Bir1 (Sli15 in budding yeast) ( Tsukahara et al, 2010 ). However, we do not observe a significant defect in bi-orientation due to lack of Cdk1 activity during normal cell cycle ( Figure 2 ). The reason for this difference is presently unclear.

Our study also reveals a requirement for Cdk1 in another critical aspect of the recovery process. We find that Cdc20 levels drop precipitously in cells recovering from SAC-induced metaphase arrest in the absence of Cdk1 activity ( Figure 6C and E ), making it virtually impossible for cells to proceed to anaphase. Since Cdc20 protein is unstable during mitosis, its level is sustained during metaphase arrest by Cdk1-dependent maintenance of CDC20 transcription ( Figure 7B and C ). However, unlike CLB2 ( Supplementary Figure S8 ), the maintenance of CDC20 transcription seems to be very sensitive to the level of Cdk1 activity. This is due to the presence of a binding site for transcription repressor Yox1 in the CDC20 promoter region ( Pramila et al, 2002 ). Binding of the repressors Yox1/Yph1 to the YOX site precludes the activation of MCM by Fkh1/2 complex ( Darieva et al, 2010 ). Such a hybrid promoter containing inhibitory YOX site together with activating FKH/MCM site is found in promoters of a subset of CLB2 cluster genes that are expressed somewhat later in mitosis ( Pramila et al, 2002 ). Our observations suggest that the dramatic decline in CDC20 transcription upon inhibition of Cdk1 activity is mediated by Yox1 since YOX1 deletion largely restores both CDC20 mRNA and Cdc20 protein levels in cdc28-as1 cells treated with 1NM-PP1 ( Figure 7D and E ). Interestingly, we find that YOX1 transcription is negatively regulated by Cdk1 ( Figure 7F ). Thus, Cdc20 abundance in mitosis is maintained via regulation of CDC20 expression by what appears to be a Cdk1-dependent, sequential system for transcriptional control. Cdk1 downregulates the expression of the transcription repressor Yox1 which in turn allows transcription of CDC20 . However, regulation of YOX1 transcription by Cdk1 remains to be investigated. YOX1 promoter contains putative binding sites for SBF/MBF ( Harbison et al, 2004 ), raising the possibility of modulation by Cdk1/Clb activity.

Premature extension of the spindle and the inability of cells to undergo anaphase in the absence of Cdk1 activity during recovery from SAC-induced arrest could be attributed to the low abundance of Cdc20, since Cdc20 levels decline dramatically upon Cdk1 inhibition ( Figure 6C ). However, cells supplied with constant levels of Cdc20 (either from MET-CDC20 construct or due to YOX1 deletion) during the recovery process also fail to undergo anaphase ( Supplementary Figure S2 ). This strongly suggests that the two functions of Cdk1 described here, that is, coordination of spindle dynamics and the maintenance of Cdc20 transcription, are regulated independently by Cdk1. This conclusion is further supported by our observations that (i) spindles prematurely extend in cells recovering from nocodazole-induced arrest in the absence of Cdk1 activity but in constant presence of Cdc20 ( Supplementary Figure S2A) , (ii) the kinetics of premature spindle extension (>3 μm) is comparable to 1NM-PP1-treated cdc28-as1 yox1 Δ and cdc28-as1 cells ( Supplementary Figure S2B ) and (iii) cells are unable to maintain Cdc20 levels in the absence of Cdk1 activity with or without the kinetochore bi-orientation ( Figure 6C and E ).

If the coordination of spindle dynamics with bi-orientation and the maintenance of CDC20 transcription are the only functions served by Cdk1 during recovery from SAC-induced arrest, then compensation of these defects by ASE1 deletion and ectopic expression of Cdc20 would be expected to overcome the recovery defect in 1NM-PP1-treated cdc28-as1 . When released from nocodazole arrest into +Gal+1NM-PP1, 32% of ase1 Δ cdc28-as1 GAL-CDC20 cells progress into anaphase (extended spindle with equally segregated CENV –GFP) compared with 16% of cdc28-as1 cells ( Supplementary Figure S9B ). The modest rescue implies that Cdk1 may serve additional functions during recovery. This is also reflected in the observation that Cdc20 expression from a heterologous promoter fails to induce efficient recovery in 1NM-PP1-treated cdc28-as1 cells released from GAL-MPS1 -induced SAC arrest ( Supplementary Figure S9A ). Nevertheless, given the general conservation of SAC between yeast and vertebrates, it will be interesting to determine if the regulatory controls and the physiological context necessary in yeast for efficient recovery from SAC-induced arrest have parallels in vertebrates. The dynamics of the recovery process has potential implications for cancer therapy with anti-mitotic agents. Recent studies on mammalian cell lines ( Tao et al, 2005 ; Gascoigne and Taylor, 2008 ; Huang et al, 2009 ) suggest that the fate of cancer cells upon anti-mitotic drug treatment depends on the balance between Cdk1 activity and apoptotic activity, and that the time cells spend in mitotic arrest subsequently determines how susceptible they are to apoptosis. Here, we have shown that in budding yeast, reduction in Cdk1 activity hinders efficient recovery from SAC, therefore prolonging the time cells spent in a SAC-arrested state. Interestingly, cdc28-as1 cells, even without 1NM-PP1 treatment, exhibit increased sensitivity to benomyl treatment compared with wild-type cells (our unpublished observation) implying that even a slight perturbation of Cdk1 activity may render cells more sensitive to spindle poisons. These considerations may have interesting and important parallels in mammalian cells that warrant further investigation in future studies.
