---
pmid: '16429126'
title: Proteome survey reveals modularity of the yeast cell machinery.
authors:
- Gavin AC
- Aloy P
- Grandi P
- Krause R
- Boesche M
- Marzioch M
- Rau C
- Jensen LJ
- Bastuck S
- Dümpelfeld B
- Edelmann A
- Heurtier MA
- Hoffman V
- Hoefert C
- Klein K
- Hudak M
- Michon AM
- Schelder M
- Schirle M
- Remor M
- Rudi T
- Hooper S
- Bauer A
- Bouwmeester T
- Casari G
- Drewes G
- Neubauer G
- Rick JM
- Kuster B
- Bork P
- Russell RB
- Superti-Furga G
journal: Nature
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature04532
---

# Proteome survey reveals modularity of the yeast cell machinery.
**Authors:** Gavin AC, Aloy P, Grandi P, Krause R, Boesche M, Marzioch M, Rau C, Jensen LJ, Bastuck S, Dümpelfeld B, Edelmann A, Heurtier MA, Hoffman V, Hoefert C, Klein K, Hudak M, Michon AM, Schelder M, Schirle M, Remor M, Rudi T, Hooper S, Bauer A, Bouwmeester T, Casari G, Drewes G, Neubauer G, Rick JM, Kuster B, Bork P, Russell RB, Superti-Furga G
**Journal:** Nature (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature04532](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature04532)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2006 Mar 30;440(7084):631-6. doi: 10.1038/nature04532. Epub 2006 Jan
22.

Proteome survey reveals modularity of the yeast cell machinery.

Gavin AC(1), Aloy P, Grandi P, Krause R, Boesche M, Marzioch M, Rau C, Jensen 
LJ, Bastuck S, Dümpelfeld B, Edelmann A, Heurtier MA, Hoffman V, Hoefert C, 
Klein K, Hudak M, Michon AM, Schelder M, Schirle M, Remor M, Rudi T, Hooper S, 
Bauer A, Bouwmeester T, Casari G, Drewes G, Neubauer G, Rick JM, Kuster B, Bork 
P, Russell RB, Superti-Furga G.

Author information:
(1)Cellzome AG, Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

Protein complexes are key molecular entities that integrate multiple gene 
products to perform cellular functions. Here we report the first genome-wide 
screen for complexes in an organism, budding yeast, using affinity purification 
and mass spectrometry. Through systematic tagging of open reading frames (ORFs), 
the majority of complexes were purified several times, suggesting screen 
saturation. The richness of the data set enabled a de novo characterization of 
the composition and organization of the cellular machinery. The ensemble of 
cellular proteins partitions into 491 complexes, of which 257 are novel, that 
differentially combine with additional attachment proteins or protein modules to 
enable a diversification of potential functions. Support for this modular 
organization of the proteome comes from integration with available data on 
expression, localization, function, evolutionary conservation, protein structure 
and binary interactions. This study provides the largest collection of 
physically determined eukaryotic cellular machines so far and a platform for 
biological data integration and modelling.

DOI: 10.1038/nature04532
PMID: 16429126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
