---
pmid: '18061161'
title: The cell surface receptor FGFRL1 forms constitutive dimers that promote cell
  adhesion.
authors:
- Rieckmann T
- Kotevic I
- Trueb B
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.10.029
---

# The cell surface receptor FGFRL1 forms constitutive dimers that promote cell adhesion.
**Authors:** Rieckmann T, Kotevic I, Trueb B
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.10.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.10.029)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 2008 Mar 10;314(5):1071-81. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.10.029.
Epub  2007 Nov 12.

The cell surface receptor FGFRL1 forms constitutive dimers that promote cell 
adhesion.

Rieckmann T(1), Kotevic I, Trueb B.

Author information:
(1)ITI Research Institute, University of Bern, Switzerland.

FGFRL1 is a novel member of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor family. 
Utilizing the FRET (fluorescence resonance energy transfer) technique, we 
demonstrate that FGFRL1 forms constitutive homodimers at cell surfaces. The 
formation of homodimers was verified by co-precipitation of differentially 
tagged FGFRL1 polypeptides from solution. If overexpressed in cultivated cells, 
FGFRL1 was found to be enriched at cell-cell contact sites. The extracellular 
domain of recombinant FGFRL1 promoted cell adhesion, but not cell spreading, 
when coated on plastic surfaces. Adhesion was mediated by heparan sulfate 
glycosaminoglycans located at the cell surface. It could specifically be blocked 
by addition of soluble heparin but not by addition of other glycosaminoglycans. 
When the amino acid sequence of the putative heparin-binding site was modified 
by in vitro mutagenesis, the resulting protein exhibited decreased affinity for 
heparin and reduced activity in the cell-binding assay. Moreover, a synthetic 
peptide corresponding to the heparin-binding site was able to neutralize the 
effect of heparin. With its dimeric structure and its adhesion promoting 
properties, FGFRL1 resembles the nectins, a family of cell adhesion molecules 
found at cell-cell junctions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.10.029
PMID: 18061161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
