---
pmid: '29549126'
title: The major facilitator transporter Str3 is required for low-affinity heme acquisition
  in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
authors:
- Normant V
- Mourer T
- Labbé S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2018'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC5925805
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.002132
---

# The major facilitator transporter Str3 is required for low-affinity heme acquisition in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
**Authors:** Normant V, Mourer T, Labbé S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA118.002132](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA118.002132)
**PMC:** [PMC5925805](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5925805/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2018 Apr 27;293(17):6349-6362. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.002132.
Epub  2018 Mar 16.

The major facilitator transporter Str3 is required for low-affinity heme 
acquisition in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Normant V(1), Mourer T(1), Labbé S(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Département de Biochimie, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la 
Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec J1E 4K8, Canada.
(2)From the Département de Biochimie, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la 
Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec J1E 4K8, Canada 
Simon.Labbe@USherbrooke.ca.

In the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe, acquisition of exogenous heme is 
largely mediated by the cell membrane-associated Shu1. Here, we report that 
Str3, a member of the major facilitator superfamily of transporters, promotes 
cellular heme import. Using a strain that cannot synthesize heme de novo (hem1Δ) 
and lacks Shu1, we found that the heme-dependent growth deficit of this strain 
is rescued by hemin supplementation in the presence of Str3. Microscopic 
analyses of a hem1Δ shu1Δ str3Δ mutant strain in the presence of the heme analog 
zinc mesoporphyrin IX (ZnMP) revealed that ZnMP fails to accumulate within the 
mutant cells. In contrast, Str3-expressing hem1Δ shu1Δ cells could take up ZnMP 
at a 10-μm concentration. The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae cannot efficiently 
transport exogenously supplied hemin. However, heterologous expression of Str3 
from S. pombe in S. cerevisiae resulted in ZnMP accumulation within S. 
cerevisiae cells. Moreover, hemin-agarose pulldown assays revealed that Str3 
binds hemin. In contrast, an Str3 mutant in which Tyr and Ser residues of two 
putative heme-binding motifs (530YX3Y534 and 552SX4Y557) had been replaced with 
alanines exhibited a loss of affinity for hemin. Furthermore, this Str3 mutant 
failed to rescue the heme-dependent growth deficit of a hem1Δ shu1Δ str3Δ 
strain. Further analysis by absorbance spectroscopy disclosed that a predicted 
extracellular loop region in Str3 containing the two putative heme-binding 
motifs interacts with hemin, with a KD of 6.6 μm Taken together, these results 
indicate that Str3 is a second cell-surface membrane protein for acquisition of 
exogenous heme in S. pombe.

© 2018 Normant et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.002132
PMCID: PMC5925805
PMID: 29549126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article

## Full Text

Abstract

In the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe , acquisition of exogenous heme is largely mediated by the cell membrane–associated Shu1. Here, we report that Str3, a member of the major facilitator superfamily of transporters, promotes cellular heme import. Using a strain that cannot synthesize heme de novo ( hem1 Δ) and lacks Shu1, we found that the heme-dependent growth deficit of this strain is rescued by hemin supplementation in the presence of Str3. Microscopic analyses of a hem1 Δ shu1 Δ str3 Δ mutant strain in the presence of the heme analog zinc mesoporphyrin IX (ZnMP) revealed that ZnMP fails to accumulate within the mutant cells. In contrast, Str3-expressing hem1 Δ shu1 Δ cells could take up ZnMP at a 10-μ m concentration. The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae cannot efficiently transport exogenously supplied hemin. However, heterologous expression of Str3 from S. pombe in S. cerevisiae resulted in ZnMP accumulation within S. cerevisiae cells. Moreover, hemin-agarose pulldown assays revealed that Str3 binds hemin. In contrast, an Str3 mutant in which Tyr and Ser residues of two putative heme-binding motifs ( 530 Y X 3 Y 534 and 552 S X 4 Y 557 ) had been replaced with alanines exhibited a loss of affinity for hemin. Furthermore, this Str3 mutant failed to rescue the heme-dependent growth deficit of a hem1 Δ shu1 Δ str3 Δ strain. Further analysis by absorbance spectroscopy disclosed that a predicted extracellular loop region in Str3 containing the two putative heme-binding motifs interacts with hemin, with a K D of 6.6 μ m . Taken together, these results indicate that Str3 is a second cell-surface membrane protein for acquisition of exogenous heme in S. pombe .

Introduction

Heme is a macrocycle molecule constituted of a protoporphyrin ring in which one atom of iron is coordinated at its center ( 1 ). The coordinated iron can adopt both oxidized (Fe 3+ ) and reduced (Fe 2+ ) states. The redox-active nature of iron makes heme a critical cofactor for a wide variety of enzymes, including cytochromes, globins, and catalases that are required in vital biochemical processes, such as respiration, oxygen transport, and disproportionation of hydrogen peroxide, respectively ( 2 ). Heme is also known to serve as a signaling molecule in cellular responses, such as antioxidant defense and regulation of the circadian clock ( 3 , 4 ). Due to its critical physiological importance, a majority of organisms have evolved with different means to secure heme ( 5 ). In the case of heme prototrophs, these organisms possess an eight-step enzymatic pathway that involves anabolic enzymes that are located either in mitochondria or the cytoplasm, depending where their specific action takes place along the biosynthetic pathway. In the case of the heme biosynthesis pathway, proteins that are required for heme production have been identified in most organisms as well as the reactions they catalyze ( 1 ). A second means used by a number of organisms is to acquire heme from external environmental sources ( 6 ). As opposed to the well-characterized enzymes responsible for the synthesis of the heme molecule, knowledge of cellular components that are required for acquisition of exogenous heme is more limited and has only been investigated in a small number of organisms.

In Schizosaccharomyces pombe , heme biosynthesis and exogenous heme uptake represent two different ways to acquire heme ( 7 ). Heme biosynthesis involves eight enzymes encoded by the following genes: hem1 + , hem2 + , hem3 + , ups1 + , hem12 + , hem13 + , hem14 + , and hem15 + . The first enzyme is named Hem1 (δ-aminolevulinate acid synthase) and produces δ-aminolevulinate (ALA) 3 by condensation of succinyl-CoA with glycine. ALA is then converted to porphobilinogen by a second enzyme (Hem2) of the biosynthetic pathway toward heme biosynthesis that involves six additional steps. In fission yeast, the hem1 + gene is essential because its disruption is lethal for the cells. A strategy to keep hem1 Δ cells alive consists of adding exogenous ALA, allowing heme biosynthesis to resume at step 2 and then proceed further along the biosynthetic pathway until production of heme. A second way to ensure viability of hem1 Δ cells is to supplement the mutant cells with exogenous hemin (heme chloride). In this case, hem1 Δ cells are therefore forced to use their own heme uptake system. This experimental design ( hem1 Δ + hemin) selectively blocks heme biosynthesis, setting conditions to investigate the mechanisms of exogenous heme acquisition by cells.

Following this approach, studies have previously shown that S. pombe iron-starved cells produced Shu1, which is a small cell-surface heme-binding protein of 25 kDa ( 7 ). Shu1 is attached to the plasma membrane via a glycosylphophatidylinositol anchor ( 8 ). Absorbance spectroscopy and hemin-agarose pulldown experiments have demonstrated that Shu1 exhibits a constant of dissociation ( K D ) of 2.2 μ m for hemin ( 7 ). Furthermore, in vivo functional growth assays have shown that the presence of Shu1 is required for assimilation of exogenous hemin by S. pombe hem1 Δ cells ( 7 ).

Studies have shown that Shu1 is required for cellular internalization of the heme analog zinc mesoporphyrin IX (ZnMP) ( 7 , 8 ). When heme biosynthesis is selectively blocked in hem1 Δ mutant cells, ZnMP first accumulates into vacuoles and then within the cytosol ( 8 ). Consistent with this observation, results have shown that in response to elevated concentrations of hemin or ZnMP, Shu1 undergoes internalization from the cell surface to the vacuole ( 8 ). Disruption of the vacuolar Abc-type transporter Abc3 results in hem1 Δ abc3 Δ mutant cells being unable to grow in the presence of hemin as the sole iron source ( 8 ). Although the pathway whereby internalized heme or its analog ZnMP becomes available to the cells is still unclear, results have shown that Abc3 participates in the mobilization of stored heme or ZnMP from the vacuole to the cytosol ( 8 ).

Besides Shu1, Abc3 (heme assimilation), and the Fip1-Fio1 iron-dependent permease-oxidase complex (reductive iron uptake) ( 9 ), there are other S. pombe transport-related proteins that are regulated at the transcriptional level in response to changes in iron concentrations ( 10 ). For instance, Str1, Str2, and Str3 expression is induced under conditions of iron starvation and repressed under iron-replete conditions ( 11 ). Str1, Str2, and Str3 proteins are classified as members of the major facilitator superfamily (MFS) of transporters ( 12 , 13 ). In the case of Str1, its heterologous expression in a Saccharomyces cerevisiae mutant strain that is deficient in high-affinity iron uptake systems results in assimilation of iron from ferrichrome ( 11 ). This result is consistent with the fact that S. pombe possesses the ability to produce ferrichrome ( 14 ) and with the plasma membrane localization of Str1 in S. pombe . In the case of Str2, its physiological role in S. pombe is still unclear, and the ORFeome global analysis of protein localization indicates that Str2 localizes to the membrane vacuole ( 15 ). Str3 displays the lowest sequence identity with Str1 and Str2 ( 11 ). Although Str3 localizes to the plasma membrane of cells ( 15 ), its heterologous expression in an iron uptake–deficient S. cerevisiae strain fails to restore growth in the presence of siderophores, including ferrichrome and ferroxiamine B ( 11 ). The biological function of Str3 remains therefore undetermined.

To further investigate the mechanisms whereby S. pombe cells acquire exogenous heme, cells lacking Hem1 and Shu1 were incubated using a range of concentrations of hemin. Although growth of hem1 Δ shu1 Δ cells was inhibited in the presence of 0.075 μ m hemin, medium supplementation with 0.15 and 0.5 μ m hemin restored the ability of hem1 Δ shu1 Δ cells to grow when hemin was the sole source of iron. The fact that hemin-dependent growth deficiency of hem1 Δ shu1 Δ cells can be overcome in a medium supplemented with high hemin concentrations (≥0.15 μ m ) indicated the presence of a Shu1-independent hemin uptake pathway. Here, we show that the presence of Str3 was required to suppress inhibited growth of hem1 Δ shu1 Δ cells in the presence of 0.15 μ m exogenous hemin. As previously shown, hem1 Δ cells expressing Shu1 were able to take up the heme analog ZnMP at a concentration of 2 μ m . In contrast, deletion of shu1 + ( shu1 Δ) led to defects in the assimilation of ZnMP, unless Str3 was expressed in hem1 Δ shu1 Δ cells in the presence of ZnMP at a concentration of 10 μ m . Inactivation of str3 Δ in a hem1 Δ shu1 Δ strain abolished assimilation of ZnMP. Expression of an active S. pombe Str3 protein in S. cerevisiae led to cellular accumulation of ZnMP, whereas untransformed S. cerevisiae failed to take up ZnMP due to the absence of an endogenous heme transport system. Results showed that Str3 binds to hemin-agarose and exhibits an equilibrium dissociation constant ( K D ) value of 6.6 μ m for hemin. Taken together, these results are consistent with the existence of an additional hemin acquisition pathway in S. pombe that involves the action of Str3.

Discussion

We have previously reported that S. pombe has the ability to utilize exogenous hemin as a heme source ( 7 ). Heme acquisition by S. pombe occurs through the activity of Shu1 in the presence of 0.075 μ m hemin in the medium ( 7 ). Here, we showed that hem1 Δ shu1 Δ mutant cells were still able to acquire exogenous hemin at concentrations of 0.15 μ m or higher, suggesting the presence of an additional mechanism for hemin acquisition. Genetic evidence for the role of Str3 as a hemin transporter was obtained by characterizing the consequence of its disruption in hem1 Δ shu1 Δ cells. Indeed, disruption of the str3 + gene ( str3 Δ) abrogated the ability of these cells to grow in the presence of 0.15 μ m hemin.

In silico membrane topology analysis of Str3 predicted that the protein contained amino acid sequence signatures characteristic of members of the MFS transporters ( 13 ). Str3 has been predicted to possess 12 transmembrane spans that are connected by short hydrophilic loops, except in the case of loops 6 and 11, which are notably longer. Loop 6 has been predicted to be cytosolic and to interconnect the first six transmembrane spans with the second half of the protein, whereas loop 11 has been predicted to be extracellular and exposed to a potential ligand. In the case of the MFS-type iron-siderophore transporter, loop 11 contains the siderophore transporter domain, in which a highly conserved Tyr residue is present and required for uptake of siderophore into the cells ( 23 ). Although this highly conserved Tyr residue (position 571) was also found in Str3, loop 11 of Str3 was unique due to the presence of two putative heme-binding sequences, 530 Y X 3 Y 534 and 552 S X 4 Y 557 , that were absent in S. pombe Str1 and Str2 proteins. These two putative heme-binding sequences were reminiscent of nea r-iron t ransporter (NEAT) motifs that are found in several Gram-positive bacteria ( 24 ). Although the initial proposed role of NEAT domains was to bind siderophores for their delivery into Gram-positive cells, subsequent studies have shown that NEAT-containing proteins function to scavenge heme from hemoproteins and to uptake it through the bacterial cell surface for delivery into the cytosol ( 24 – 26 ). Several NEAT proteins contain a domain in which amino acid sequences are arranged in S X 4 Y and Y X 3 Y configurations that are important for heme-binding function ( 24 ). In bacteria, the canonical S X 4 Y motif is generally found within a small and unique α-helix structure located at the N terminus of the NEAT domain. The remaining part of the domain is constituted of eight β-strands that form a conserved β-barrel fold. The Y X 3 Y motif is found within the eighth β-strand located at the C terminus of the domain. In the case of loop 11 of Str3, its structural conformation is unknown. However, according to an in silico three-dimensional model by I-TASSER ( 16 ), a putative heme-binding pocket has been predicted and comprises the Y X 3 Y and S X 4 Y motifs. In the current report, mutations of the Y X 3 Y and S X 4 Y motifs in Str3 led cells expressing the str3-Y530A/Y534A/S552A/Y557A allele to be unable to rescue hem1 Δ shu1 Δ str3 Δ cells to grow in the presence of hemin compared with hem1 Δ shu1 Δ str3 Δ cells expressing a WT str3 + allele. Furthermore, pulldown assays using protein lysates prepared from cells expressing Str3-Y530A/Y534A/S552A/Y557A showed that substitutions of Tyr 530 , Tyr 534 , Ser 552 , and Tyr 557 for the corresponding Ala residues markedly decreased Str3 binding to hemin-agarose. When the WT version of the loop 11 of Str3(522–576) was produced and purified from E. coli , it was retained on hemin-agarose beads using pulldown assays. In contrast, a mutant form of loop 11 containing Y530A/Y534A/S552A/Y557A substitutions failed to bind hemin-agarose beads, revealing that Tyr 530 , Tyr 534 , Ser 552 , and Tyr 557 residues participated in hemin coordination in Str3. However, determination of whether one amino acid residue has a contribution to binding higher than the others or whether there is influence of additional amino acid residues flanking the motif or elsewhere will require additional studies. Based on an in silico -generated model, the Y X 3 Y and S X 4 Y motifs located in loop 11 of Str3 may serve as a docking site to facilitate heme entry into the central cavity of the MFS transporter.

S. pombe Str3 is not the unique case of the MFS-type transporter that mediates heme transport. In humans, FLVCR1a, FLVCR1b, and FLVCR2 are MFS-type transporters ( 27 – 31 ). FLVCR1a is a plasma membrane heme exporter ( 30 ). FLVCR1b encodes a shorter isoform of FLVCR1a that localizes to the mitochondrial membrane ( 27 ). FLVCR1b possesses six hydrophobic transmembrane domains, and it is likely that FLVCR1b homodimerizes to form a full-length transporter with 12 transmembrane domains similar to FLVCR1a. It has been reported that FLVCR1b functions as a mitochondrial heme exporter ( 27 ). In the case of FLVCR2 expressed in mammalian cells and Xenopus laevis oocytes, it functions as an importer of heme ( 28 ). In cats, the cell-surface heme exporter FLVCR1a is recognized and bound by the feline leukemia virus subgroup C (FeLV-C) ( 32 ). Although loop 11 of FLVCR1a is shorter compared with that of Str3, FLVCR1a loop 11 is required for FeLV-C–FLVCR1 association ( 32 ). Upon binding of FLVCR1a by FeLV-C viruses, cellular heme efflux is blocked. The observation that FLVCR1a loop 11 functions as a docking site for FeLV-C is reminiscent of our findings that loop 11 of Str3 is involved in heme binding and may serve as an initial docking site for heme.

Structural studies of MFS transporters have shown that the 12 α-helical transmembrane spans are organized into two six-helix halves ( 12 , 13 ). Substrate transport across the membrane probably occurs via a clamp-and-switch (also called rocker-switch) mechanism whereby the two halves of the transporter cycle through outward-opening (substrate loaded), occluded (substrate bound), and inward-opening (substrate released) conformations. At present, the nature of the amino acid residues of Str3 and FLVCR that coordinate heme in the occluded state of the transporters is unknown. However, in the case of FLVCR1a, an in silico sequence analysis of heme carrier proteins has suggested that His 145 , Tyr 153 , and His 198 are likely to be involved in the heme transport process ( 30 , 33 ). Pairwise sequence alignment between Str3 and FLVCR1a has revealed that Tyr 153 is conserved in both proteins. Furthermore, the aromatic side chain of Tyr 153 (found at position 160 in Str3) is predicted to be positioned in the center of the transporter and available for substrate coordination. Additional studies will be required to confirm the functional role of Tyr 160 in Str3 as well as to identify additional amino acid residues that coordinate heme in the heme-bound occluded state of Str3.

S. pombe uses three distinct strategies for acquisition of iron from environmental sources. A first system involves the transport of reduced free iron ions through an oxidase-permease–based iron uptake machinery that consists of the Fio1 and Fip1 proteins, respectively ( 9 ). A second system takes up siderophore-bound iron through the ferrichrome transporter Str1 ( 11 ). A third system triggers assimilation of exogenous heme using the cell-surface proteins Shu1 and Str3. Interestingly, str3 + and shu1 + are gene neighbors on chromosome I of S. pombe , and their transcription is oriented in the same direction. In the case of Shu1, experiments using the heme analog ZnMP have shown that the prosthetic group first accumulates into vacuole and then within the cytoplasm ( 8 ). Furthermore, the same study has shown that mobilization of stored ZnMP from the vacuole for redistribution within the cytoplasm requires the vacuolar transporter Abc3 ( 8 ). Upon the addition of the iron chelator Dip, we observed that expression profiles of fio1 + (or fip1 + ) and str1 + were rapidly induced within 15–30 min of treatment. This step was followed by a sustained induction of fio1 + and str1 + mRNA levels for at least 4 h. In the case of shu1 + , abc3 + , and str3 + , under the same conditions, their transcript levels were detected at times later than those of fio1 + and str1 + . Furthermore, shu1 + , abc3 + , and str3 + mRNA levels were at their maximum levels only after 4 h in iron-starved cells. This observation suggests a common temporal regulation for shu1 + , abc3 + , and str3 + compared with fio1 + and str1 + .

We have shown previously that Shu1 interacts with hemin with a K D of 2.2 μ m ( 7 ). In the current study, results showed that loop 11 of Str3 exhibits a K D value of 6.6 μ m for hemin. These results revealed that Str3 possesses a lower affinity for hemin than Shu1. Consistent with this observation, the hemin-dependent growth deficiency of a hem1 Δ shu1 Δ double mutant (expressing str3 + ) can only be rescued when exogenous hemin exceeded ≥2 times the concentration that is required to overcome hemin deficiency of a hem1 Δ single mutant (expressing shu1 + ). When the abc3 + gene was deleted in a hem1 Δ shu1 Δ mutant strain, hem1 Δ shu1 Δ abc3 Δ cells exhibited similar growth compared with hem1 Δ shu1 Δ cells in the presence of 0.15 μ m hemin, revealing that Str3 function was unaffected by the absence of the vacuolar transporter Abc3. Together, the results revealed that S. pombe possesses two systems with different affinities to bring exogenous heme into the cell. As a saprophyte fungus, these two transport systems identified in S. pombe may strengthen its ability to acquire external heme from natural sources in its environment.
