---
pmid: '16478791'
title: APC inhibits ERK pathway activation and cellular proliferation induced by RAS.
authors:
- Park KS
- Jeon SH
- Kim SE
- Bahk YY
- Holmen SL
- Williams BO
- Chung KC
- Surh YJ
- Choi KY
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.02779
---

# APC inhibits ERK pathway activation and cellular proliferation induced by RAS.
**Authors:** Park KS, Jeon SH, Kim SE, Bahk YY, Holmen SL, Williams BO, Chung KC, Surh YJ, Choi KY
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.02779](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.02779)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2006 Mar 1;119(Pt 5):819-27. doi: 10.1242/jcs.02779. Epub 2006 Feb
 14.

APC inhibits ERK pathway activation and cellular proliferation induced by RAS.

Park KS(1), Jeon SH, Kim SE, Bahk YY, Holmen SL, Williams BO, Chung KC, Surh YJ, 
Choi KY.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Biotechnology, 
Yonsei University, Seoul 120-752, Korea.

Inactivating mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene (APC), and 
activating mutations in RAS, occur in a majority of colorectal carcinomas. 
However, the relationship between these changes and tumorigenesis is poorly 
understood. RAS-induced activation of the ERK pathway was reduced by 
overexpressing APC in DLD-1 colorectal cancer cells. ERK activity was increased 
by Cre-virus-induced Apc knockout in primary Apc(flox/flox) mouse embryonic 
fibroblasts, indicating that APC inhibits ERK activity. ERK activity was 
increased by overexpression and decreased by knock down of beta-catenin. The 
activation of Raf1, MEK and ERK kinases by beta-catenin was reduced by 
co-expression of APC. These results indicate that APC inhibits the ERK pathway 
by an action on beta-catenin. RAS-induced activation of the ERK pathway was 
reduced by the dominant negative form of TCF4, indicating that the ERK pathway 
regulation by APC/beta-catenin signaling is, at least, partly caused by effects 
on beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated gene expression. The GTP loading and the protein 
level of mutated RAS were decreased in cells with reduced ERK activity as a 
result of APC overexpression, indicating that APC regulates RAS-induced ERK 
activation at least partly by reduction of the RAS protein level. APC regulates 
cellular proliferation and transformation induced by activation of both RAS and 
beta-catenin signaling.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.02779
PMID: 16478791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
