---
pmid: '18406331'
title: Glycolytic enzyme GAPDH promotes peroxide stress signaling through multistep
  phosphorelay to a MAPK cascade.
authors:
- Morigasaki S
- Shimada K
- Ikner A
- Yanagida M
- Shiozaki K
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2374695
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.01.017
---

# Glycolytic enzyme GAPDH promotes peroxide stress signaling through multistep phosphorelay to a MAPK cascade.
**Authors:** Morigasaki S, Shimada K, Ikner A, Yanagida M, Shiozaki K
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2008.01.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2008.01.017)
**PMC:** [PMC2374695](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2374695/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2008 Apr 11;30(1):108-13. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.01.017.

Glycolytic enzyme GAPDH promotes peroxide stress signaling through multistep 
phosphorelay to a MAPK cascade.

Morigasaki S(1), Shimada K, Ikner A, Yanagida M, Shiozaki K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Biological Sciences, University of 
California, Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Phosphorelay signaling of environmental stimuli by two-component systems is 
prevailing in bacteria and also utilized by fungi and plants. In the fission 
yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe, peroxide stress signals are transmitted from 
the Mak2/3 sensor kinases to the Mpr1 histidine-containing phosphotransfer (HPt) 
protein and finally to the Mcs4 response regulator, which activates a MAP kinase 
cascade. Here we show that, unexpectedly, the glycolytic enzyme 
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) physically associates with the 
Mcs4 response regulator and stress-responsive MAP kinase kinase kinases 
(MAPKKKs). In response to H2O2 stress, Cys-152 of the Tdh1 GAPDH is transiently 
oxidized, which enhances the association of Tdh1 with Mcs4. Furthermore, Tdh1 is 
essential for the interaction between the Mpr1 HPt protein and the Mcs4 response 
regulator and thus for phosphorelay signaling. These results demonstrate that 
the glycolytic enzyme GAPDH plays an essential role in the phosphorelay 
signaling, where its redox-sensitive cysteine residue may provide additional 
input signals.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.01.017
PMCID: PMC2374695
PMID: 18406331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

In the prototypical bacterial two-component system, a “sensor kinase” phosphorylates a histidine residue within its kinase domain in response to stimuli, and the phosphoryl group is then transferred to an aspartate residue in a “response regulator” protein ( Stock et al., 2000 ). A variation of the two-component system, multistep phosphorelays, have also been found in fungi and plants, where a histidine-containing phosphotransfer (HPt) protein mediates the phosphotransfer from a sensor kinase to a response regulator ( Saito, 2001 ; Grefen and Harter, 2004 ). In the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe , a multistep phosphorelay composed of the Mak2/3 sensor histidine kinases, Mpr1 HPt protein and Mcs4 response regulator transmits hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) stress signals to the Spc1 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade ( Aoyama et al., 2000 ; Nguyen et al., 2000 ; Buck et al., 2001 ; Quinn et al., 2002 ), forming a hybrid of the prokaryotic and eukaryotic signaling modules ( Figure 1 ).

S. pombe Spc1 (also known as Sty1) MAPK ( Millar et al., 1995 ; Shiozaki and Russell, 1995 ) belongs to the evolutionarily conserved stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK) family, whose members include Hog1 in budding yeast ( Brewster et al., 1993 ) as well as p38 and JNK MAPKs in mammals ( Kyriakis and Avruch, 2001 ). The Spc1 MAPK cascade is composed of Wis1 MAPK kinase (MAPKK) ( Warbrick and Fantes, 1991 ) and two homologous MAPKK kinases (MAPKKKs), Wis4 and Win1 ( Figure 1 ) ( Shieh et al., 1997 ; Shiozaki et al., 1997 ; Samejima et al., 1998 ; Shieh et al., 1998 ). Like mammalian p38 and JNK pathways ( Kyriakis and Avruch, 2001 ), the Spc1 cascade is activated by diverse forms of stress, such as high osmolarity, oxidative stress, heat shock and nutritional starvation ( Nguyen and Shiozaki, 2002 ). Among those stress stimuli, only oxidative stress of H 2 O 2 appears to be sensed and transmitted by the Mak2/3–Mpr1–Mcs4 phosphorelay, because Δ mak2 , Δ mak3 and Δ mpr1 mutants are defective only in the H 2 O 2 -induced Spc1 activation ( Nguyen et al., 2000 ; Buck et al., 2001 ; Quinn et al., 2002 ). Consistently, the mcs4DN mutant, in which the phosphoacceptor site of the Mcs4 response regulator was mutated, also shows a Spc1 activation defect specifically in response to H 2 O 2 but not other forms of oxidative stress ( Buck et al., 2001 ).

Here we show that, Wis4/Win1 MAPKKKs and the Mcs4 response regulator form a complex with Tdh1, the glycolytic enzyme glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH). In response to H 2 O 2 stress, Tdh1 is transiently oxidized at Cys-152, which enhances its interaction with the Mcs4 response regulator. Furthermore, a point mutation to Cys-152 as well as the tdh1 null mutation compromise the interaction of Mcs4 with the Mpr1 HPt protein, leading to a defect in H 2 O 2 stress signaling through the phosphorelay. These results demonstrate that the glycolytic enzyme GAPDH plays a previously unknown, essential role in phosphorelay signaling to a response regulator.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The two homologous MAPKKKs, Wis4 and Win1, in the Spc1 MAPK cascade ( Figure 1 ) have a large non-catalytic domain (>1,000 amino-acid residues), which might serve as a platform for proteins transmitting stress signals to the cascade. Aiming to identify proteins physically interact with these MAPKKKs, we performed in parallel biochemical purification of Wis4-interacting proteins and a yeast two-hybrid screen with Win1 as bait. Purification of Wis4 with the TAP ( t andem a ffinity p urification) tag ( Rigaut et al., 1999 ) from S. pombe cell lysate ( Figure 2A ), followed by mass spectrometry analysis, successfully identified two proteins as components of the MAPKKK complex. Consistent with a previous report ( Buck et al., 2001 ), one is the Mcs4 response regulator. The other is Tdh1, GAPDH enzyme that catalyzes the sixth step of the glycolytic pathway. In a reciprocal experiment, Ni-affinity purification of Tdh1 tagged with six histidine residues resulted in co-purification of Wis4 MAPKKK but not other unrelated protein kinases ( Figure 2B ), confirming the specific association between Tdh1 and the MAPKKK. Win1 MAPKKK was also co-purified with Tdh1 in similar experiments (e.g., Figure S2B ). Moreover, our second approach, the yeast two-hybrid screen, independently isolated Tdh1, although the interaction between Tdh1 and Win1 MAPKKK in the two-hybrid assay strain was relatively weak (data not shown). Together, these results indicate that the Mcs4 response regulator and Tdh1 GAPDH physically associate with the stress-response MAPKKKs.

To study the function of Tdh1 in stress signaling to the Spc1 MAPK cascade, we constructed the tdh1 null (Δ tdh1 ) mutant. Haploid Δ tdh1 cells were viable in the glucose growth media, because S. pombe has gpd3 + , a second GAPDH gene expressed at a much lower level than tdh1 + (data not shown). In Δ tdh1 cells, activation of Spc1 MAPK in response to oxidative stress of H 2 O 2 is significantly reduced and more transient, comparing to that in wild-type cells ( Figure 2C ). On the other hand, Spc1 activation by other forms of stress, such as high osmolarity and glucose starvation appeared to be normal in the Δ tdh1 mutant ( Figure S1 ), indicating a specific role of Tdh1 in H 2 O 2 stress signaling to Spc1 MAPK. However, association of Tdh1 with Wis4 and Win1 MAPKKKs was constitutive and not affected by H 2 O 2 stress ( Figure S2 ). In addition, Tdh1 is not required for association of the Mcs4 response regulator with the MAPKKKs both in the presence and absence of H 2 O 2 stress ( Figure S3 ).

The peroxide stress-specific defect of Δ tdh1 in Spc1 activation is very similar to that of the phosphorelay mutants, Δ mak2 , Δ mak3 and Δ mpr1 ( Buck et al., 2001 ; Nguyen et al., 2000 ; Quinn et al., 2002 ). Furthermore, the Spc1 activation defect in the Δ tdh1 Δ mpr1 double mutant is not significantly more severe than that in the individual single mutants ( Figure 3A ), suggesting that Tdh1 is involved in the H 2 O 2 stress signaling through the phosphorelay system. Only weak Spc1 activation by a phosphorelay-independent mechanism ( Nguyen et al., 2000 ) was detectable in these mutant strains. Consistently, mutations to the histidine phosphorylation site (His-221) in the Mpr1 HPt protein ( mpr1HQ ; Nguyen et al., 2000 ) and to the phosphoacceptor site (Asp-412) in the Mcs4 response regulator ( mcs4DN ; Buck et al., 2001 ) were also epistatic to Δ tdh1 ( Figure S4 ). Moreover, we found that the physical interaction between Mpr1 and Mcs4 significantly weakened in Δ tdh1 ( Figure 3B ), consistent with the idea that H 2 O 2 stress signaling through the phosphorelay is compromised in this mutant. In addition, co-purification experiments demonstrated the binding of Tdh1 to the Mcs4 response regulator ( Figure 3C , “WT”). The Tdh1–Mcs4 association was somewhat reduced but still detectable in the absence of Wis4 and Win1 MAPKKKs (data not shown), implying their direct interaction. Together, these results lead to a model that association of Tdh1 GAPDH to the Mcs4 response regulator promotes the physical interaction, and thus phosphorelay, between the Mpr1 HPt protein and Mcs4.

We noticed that the interaction between Tdh1 and Mcs4 is transiently enhanced in response to H 2 O 2 stress; Mcs4 co-precipitated with Tdh1 increased within 2 min after the stress and went back to the initial level after 20~40 min ( Figure 3C ). Similar phenomena were observed in the absence of phosphorelay signaling in mpr1HQ cells ( Figure 3C ), indicating that the phosphorelay to Mcs4 is not responsible for the increased Tdh1-Mcs4 interaction upon H 2 O 2 stress. Therefore, we looked into the possibility that Tdh1 GAPDH is subjected to a biochemical change under peroxide stress. GAPDH enzymes have a conserved Cys residue in the catalytic center, and under H 2 O 2 stress, the nucleophilic sulfhydryl (SH) group of this residue is oxidized by S -thiolation, which inactivates the enzyme and halts glycolysis ( Ravichandran et al., 1994 ; Schuppe-Koistinen et al., 1994 ; Grant et al., 1999 ). In response to H 2 O 2 , we indeed detected transient Tdh1 oxidation, which is sensitive to DTT ( Figure 4A , DTT+). Among the three Cys residues in Tdh1, substitution of Cys-152 with Ser (C152S) completely abolished the H 2 O 2 -induced oxidation of Tdh1 ( Figure 4B ). Thus, as reported with GAPDH proteins in other organisms, the conserved catalytic Cys residue in Tdh1 is oxidized upon H 2 O 2 stress. In a strain carrying the tdh1C152S allele, the Tdh1-Mcs4 association was not enhanced in response to H 2 O 2 ( Figure 4C ), while the C152S mutation did not prevent the interaction of Tdh1 with Wis4 and Win1 MAPKKKs ( Figure S2 ). Thus, peroxide stress-induced oxidation of Tdh1 appears to promote its interaction with the Mcs4 response regulator. Moreover, like the Δ tdh1 mutant, strains carrying the tdh1C152S mutation showed reduced interaction between the Mpr1 HPt protein and Mcs4 ( Figure 3B ), as well as compromised activation of Spc1 MAPK in response to H 2 O 2 ( Figure 4D ). These results suggest that Tdh1 Cys-152 plays an essential role in the phosphorelay signaling between the Mpr1 HPt protein and the Mcs4 response regulator.

Phosphorelay signaling by two-component systems is absent in mammals and therefore, it is regarded as a potential target for novel antibiotics ( Stephenson and Hoch, 2002 ). In S. pombe, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and probably other fungi, a stress-sensing multistep phosphorelay is connected to a MAPK cascade ( Saito, 2001 ; Santos and Shiozaki, 2001 ). As a linker of the two signaling modules in S. pombe , the Mcs4 response regulator of the phosphorelay binds and transmits H 2 O 2 stress signals to the MAPKKKs of the Spc1 cascade ( Nguyen et al., 2000 ; Buck et al., 2001 ; this study). Unexpectedly, we have identified GAPDH, a glycolytic enzyme, as a component of the Mcs4-MAPKKK complex. Tdh1 GAPDH associated with Mcs4 is required for the interaction between the response regulator and the Mpr1 HPt protein ( Figure S5 ). Artificial overexpression of a minor GAPDH isozyme, Gpd3, complements the Δ tdh1 defect in H 2 O 2 -induced Spc1 activation (data not shown), suggesting that Gpd3 is also capable of promoting the phosphorelay signaling. GAPDH is a highly conserved protein in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, and it is possible that GAPDH is also an essential component of other phosphorelay signaling systems in bacteria, fungi and plants. H 2 O 2 stress induces oxidation of Tdh1 Cys-152, which appears to promote interaction of Tdh1 with the Mcs4 response regulator, and moreover, Cys-152 is critical for the Tdh1 function in the Mpr1–Mcs4 phosphorelay. The corresponding Cys residue of GAPDH in other organisms is also modified under oxidative stress, which was proposed to be a mechanism to protect the glycolytic enzyme from irreversible oxidative inactivation ( Ravichandran et al., 1994 ; Schuppe-Koistinen et al., 1994 ; Grant et al., 1999 ). Our results have shown that, with its redox-sensitive Cys residue, GAPDH can modulate cellular signaling pathways in response to peroxide stress. Also in mammalian systems, modification of the catalytic Cys residue of GAPDH is implicated in the H 2 O 2 -induced activation of phospholipase D2 ( Kim et al., 2003 ). The same Cys residue of GAPDH is S -nitrosylated in nitric oxide (NO)-induced apoptosis, leading to binding of GAPDH to an E3 ubiquitin ligase and nuclear translocation of the complex ( Hara et al., 2005 ). In addition to its role in glycolysis, GAPDH appears to have diverse cellular functions ( Sirover, 1999 ), which may be under redox regulation as well.

S. pombemethods

S. pombe strains used in this study are listed in Table S1 in the Supplemental Data . Growth media and basic techniques for fission yeast were previously described ( Alfa et al., 1993 ). HATAP- and epitope-tagging and gene disruption were performed by the PCR-based method ( Bähler et al., 1998 ). Phenotypic analysis confirmed that the tag sequences did not affect the function of the proteins used in this study. Site-directed mutagenesis was performed using the QuikChange kit (Stratagene). Stress treatment of S. pombe cells was carried out as previously described ( Shiozaki et al., 1997 ). For oxidative stress, H 2 O 2 was used at the final concentration of 0.73 mM. Activation of Spc1 MAPK was monitored by immunoblotting with anti-phospho-p38 (Cell Signaling Technology) or anti-phospho-Spc1 polyclonal antibodies ( Tatebe and Shiozaki, 2003 ).
