---
pmid: '12867595'
title: The cell death regulator GRIM-19 is an inhibitor of signal transducer and activator
  of transcription 3.
authors:
- Zhang J
- Yang J
- Roy SK
- Tininini S
- Hu J
- Bromberg JF
- Poli V
- Stark GR
- Kalvakolanu DV
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2003'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC170920
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1633516100
---

# The cell death regulator GRIM-19 is an inhibitor of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3.
**Authors:** Zhang J, Yang J, Roy SK, Tininini S, Hu J, Bromberg JF, Poli V, Stark GR, Kalvakolanu DV
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1633516100](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1633516100)
**PMC:** [PMC170920](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC170920/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Aug 5;100(16):9342-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1633516100. Epub 2003 Jul 16.

The cell death regulator GRIM-19 is an inhibitor of signal transducer and 
activator of transcription 3.

Zhang J(1), Yang J, Roy SK, Tininini S, Hu J, Bromberg JF, Poli V, Stark GR, 
Kalvakolanu DV.

Author information:
(1)Greenebaum Cancer Center, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

GRIM-19 (gene associated with retinoid-IFN-induced mortality 19), isolated as a 
cell death activator in a genetic screen used to define mechanisms involved in 
IFN-beta- and retinoic acid-induced cell death, codes for a approximately 16-kDa 
protein that induces apoptosis in a number of cell lines. Antisense ablation of 
GRIM-19 caused resistance to cell death induced by IFN plus retinoic acid and 
conferred a growth advantage to cells. To understand the molecular bases for its 
cell death regulatory activity, we used a yeast two-hybrid screen and identified 
that the transcription factor STAT3 (signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 3) binds to GRIM-19. GRIM-19 inhibits transcription driven by 
activation of STAT3, but not STAT1. It neither inhibits the ligand-induced 
activation of STAT3 nor blocks its ability to bind to DNA. Mutational analysis 
indicates that the transactivation domain of STAT3, especially residue S727, is 
required for GRIM-19 binding. Because GRIM-19 does not bind significantly to 
other STATs, our studies identify a specific inhibitor of STAT3. Because 
constitutively active STAT3 up-regulates antiapoptotic genes to promote tumor 
survival, its inhibition by GRIM-19 also demonstrates an antioncogenic effect 
exerted by biological therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1633516100
PMCID: PMC170920
PMID: 12867595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

GRIM-19 (gene associated with retinoid-IFN-induced mortality 19), isolated
 as a cell death activator in a genetic screen used to define mechanisms
 involved in IFN-β- and retinoic acid-induced cell death, codes for a
 ≈16-kDa protein that induces apoptosis in a number of cell lines. Antisense
 ablation of GRIM-19 caused resistance to cell death induced by IFN plus
 retinoic acid and conferred a growth advantage to cells. To understand the
 molecular bases for its cell death regulatory activity, we used a yeast
 two-hybrid screen and identified that the transcription factor STAT3 (signal
 transducer and activator of transcription 3) binds to GRIM-19. GRIM-19
 inhibits transcription driven by activation of STAT3, but not STAT1. It
 neither inhibits the ligand-induced activation of STAT3 nor blocks its ability
 to bind to DNA. Mutational analysis indicates that the transactivation domain
 of STAT3, especially residue S727, is required for GRIM-19 binding. Because
 GRIM-19 does not bind significantly to other STATs, our studies identify a
 specific inhibitor of STAT3. Because constitutively active STAT3 up-regulates
 antiapoptotic genes to promote tumor survival, its inhibition by GRIM-19 also
 demonstrates an antioncogenic effect exerted by biological therapeutics.

Materials and Methods

Plasmids, Cell Lines, and Antibodies. WT and mutant STAT3 proteins
 were expressed with N-terminally flag-epitope tags, by using the pCMV2-flag
 vector. Deletion and substitution mutations were engineered with the aid of
 PCR. Expression-verified mutants were used for further experiments. STAT3-DB
 ( 16 ) and mAbs against GRIM-19
 ( 17 ) have been described.
 Antibodies against native, tyrosine (STAT3-YP) and serine (STAT3-SP)
 phosphorylated forms of STAT3 (Cell Signaling, Beverly, MA), STAT1, STAT2,
 STAT5a, and c-Jun (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), and hemagglutinin tag, myc tag,
 and actin (Sigma) were used. Soluble IL-6 receptor, IL-6 (R & D Systems),
 human IFN-β (Ares-Serono, Geneva), RA (Sigma), and murine IFN-γ
 (Pestka Biomedical Labs, Piscataway, NJ) were used as necessary. MCF-7, WT,
 STAT3 – / – ( 18 ), and
 STAT1 – / – ( 19 ) cells were grown in DMEM
 with 5% charcoal-stripped FBS. An immortalized human mammary epithelial cell
 line hTERT-HME (CLONTECH) was grown as suggested by the supplier. The
 pLEGFP-Stat3-WT or pLEGFP-Stat3-Y705F vectors were generated by inserting WT
 Stat3 or Y705F-Stat3 cDNA into the Hin dIII site of a retroviral
 vector pLEGFP-N1 (CLONTECH). To obtain infectious retrovirus, each construct
 was transfected into BOSC23 (CLONTECH) packaging cells, and after 48 h
 supernatants were used to infect hTERT-HME1 cells on 3 consecutive days.
 Stably transduced hTERT-HME1 cell pools were shown to express STAT3 proteins
 of the expected size by Western analysis.

Gene Expression Analyses. Western analysis, immunoprecipitation
 (IP), electrophoretic mobility-shift assay (EMSA), luciferase assays, and
 β-galactosidase reporter assays were performed as described
 ( 12 , 20 ). For Northern analysis,
 total RNA was probed with 32 P-labeled DNAs corresponding to cdc2 or
 cyclin B1
 ( 21 – 23 ).
 The cDNA probes were generated from 4 μg of hTERT-HME1 total RNA, using
 Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase (Life Technologies,
 Rockville, MD). RT-PCR amplification was carried out for one cycle at 95°C
 for 5 min, followed by 32 cycles at 95°C for 45 s, 62°C for 45 s, and
 72°C for 45 s. PCR primers used were as follows:
 5′-ATCGGGGAACCTCTGATTTT-3′ (sense) and
 5′-TCACACACAGGCACCTTCTC-3′ (antisense) for cyclin B1
 ( 24 ), and
 5′-GTCAGTCTTCAGGATGTGCT-3′ (sense) and
 5′-GGCCACACTTCATTATTGGG-3′ (antisense) for cdc2
 ( 25 ). A 32 P-labeled
 double-stranded oligonucleotide with the sequence
 5′-GATCCTTCTGGGAATTCCTAGATC-3′ was used for STAT3 EMSA. The S3-Luc
 construct bears three copies of the Stat3 binding site (similar to the one
 found in human C-reactive protein gene promoter) cloned upstream of a
 luciferase reporter driven by the thymidine kinase (TK) promoter. Palindromic
 IFN-response element (pIRE)-Luc contains three copies of the pIRE of the IRF1
 promoter upstream of the TK promoter. Luciferase reporters driven by the
 cyclin B1 and cdc2 promoters have been described
 ( 26 , 27 ). The
 β-actin–β-galactosidase reporter was used as an internal
 control for normalizing variations in transfection efficiency.

Yeast Two-Hybrid Screen. The commercially available Matchmaker 3
 system (CLONTECH) was used for isolating GRIM-19-interacting proteins.
 Briefly, the full-length GRIM-19 ORF was expressed as a myc-tagged fusion
 protein with the DNA binding domain (DBD) of GAL4 from the plasmid pGBKT7 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain AH109. A pretransformed (yeast strain
 Y187) human bone marrow cDNA library, expressed as hemagglutinin
 epitope-tagged fusion proteins with the TAD of GAL4 in pAct2, was used as a
 source of GRIM-19 binding partners. The two strains were mated, and positive
 clones were isolated after selection on minimal medium lacking leucine,
 tryptophan, and histidine. The specificity of interaction was validated by
 performing cotransformation of the individual plasmids identified in the first
 round with GRIM-19. Positive clones were sequenced to identify the gene.

Results

Identification of STAT3 as a GRIM-19 Binding Protein. To identify
 targets of GRIM-19, we used a yeast two-hybrid screen and identified 16
 individual positive colonies from a library that expressed ≈1 ×
 10 6 cDNAs in the first round. Among these, four independent clones
 were identified later as STAT3. All of the rescued STAT3 plasmids lacked the
 N-terminal 40 aa, eliminating an essential role for this domain in the
 interaction with GRIM-19. We have prioritized an analysis of the interactions
 between GRIM-19 and STAT3 because Stat3 is activated constitutively by a
 number of oncogenes and growth factors in tumor cells
 ( 15 , 28 ). The other clones remain
 to be characterized. Whereas the single and double yeast transformants grew on
 media containing leucine, tryptophan, and histidine
 ( Fig. 1 A ), as
 expected, only double transformants expressing STAT3 and GRIM-19 survived in
 minimal medium lacking these nutrients
 ( Fig. 1 B ). We also
 confirmed the interaction between STAT3 and GRIM-19 in yeast extracts (data
 not shown).

Interaction Between STAT3 and GRIM-19 in Mammalian Cells. To
 demonstrate the physiological relevance of the yeast two-hybrid data in
 mammalian cells, human breast carcinoma MCF-7 cells were stimulated with
 IFN/RA (known inducers of GRIM-19), and cell lysates were immunoprecipitated
 with GRIM-19-specific antibodies. The products were probed with STAT3-specific
 antibodies in a Western analysis. As shown in Fig. 2 , STAT3 binds to GRIM-19
 in the unstimulated state. After IFN/RA treatment, more STAT3 was
 coimmunoprecipitated with GRIM-19 ( Fig.
 2 B ). This increase appears, in part, to be caused by a
 rise in cellular GRIM-19 content ( Fig.
 2 A ). There was no change in STAT3 levels under these
 conditions. Conversely, GRIM-19 was coimmunoprecipitated by STAT3 antibodies
 ( Fig. 2 D ). A similar
 profile of interaction between GRIM-19 and STAT3 was observed in HeLa, T47D,
 and BT20 cells (data not shown). We examined the specificity of this
 interaction further by performing an IP with STAT3 antibodies using lysates
 from WT and STAT3 – / – mouse
 embryonic fibroblasts. STAT3 antibodies failed to coimmunoprecipitate GRIM-19
 from the mutant but not WT cells ( Fig.
 2 E ). No difference in the steady-state expression of
 GRIM-19 was noted between these two cell types
 ( Fig. 2 G ). STAT3 was
 also coimmunoprecipitated with GRIM-19 from
 STAT1 – / – cells (data not shown).
 Thus, the GRIM-19–STAT3 interactions are specific and occur under
 physiological conditions.

GRIM-19 Does Not Bind to Other STATs. IP with GRIM-19 antibodies,
 followed by Western analysis of the products with STAT-specific antibodies,
 did not reveal an appreciable interaction between GRIM-19 and other STATs
 ( Fig. 2 H – L ). We performed these experiments in
 STAT3 – / – cells to avoid a
 potential interaction of STAT3 with other STATs, which could permit the
 indirect IP of these STATs with GRIM-19 through STAT3. In both WT and
 STAT3 – / – cells, no strong
 interaction between GRIM-19 and STAT1, STAT2, or STAT5a was detected, despite
 their abundant expression. Similar results were obtained in other cell types
 (data not shown). The STAT1 antibody detects both the α and β
 isoforms, which can be seen in the Western assay
 ( Fig. 3 I ). IFN-γ
 treatment, which activates STAT1α and STAT1β
 ( 29 ), did not enhance these
 interactions ( Fig.
 3 J ). However, upon prolonged exposure, we detected weak
 STAT1α and STAT1β bands (data not shown). A comparable level of
 GRIM-19 was present in both cell types
 ( Fig. 3 K ), indicating
 that this difference could not be attributed to lack of GRIM-19.

GRIM-19 Is an Inhibitor of STAT3-Dependent Gene Expression. We next
 examined the biological significance of GRIM-19/STAT3 interactions
 ( Fig. 3 ). A luciferase reporter
 (S3-Luc) driven by a minimal STAT3-responsive element was used in transient
 transfection studies in MCF-7 cells. First, we examined the effect of IFN/RA
 on the IL-6-induced expression of S3-Luc. Luciferase expression was strongly
 induced upon IL-6 treatment, which was inhibited by IFN/RA
 ( Fig. 3 A ). IFN/RA
 itself did not induce the reporter. In a separate experiment, cells were
 transfected with GRIM-19 and the effects on IL-6 induced expression of S3-Luc
 were studied. Although the empty expression vector had no effect on
 IL-6-induced expression of S3-Luc, GRIM-19 ablated it
 ( Fig. 3 B ). Basal
 expression of the reporter was repressed to a slight, but significant, extent.
 We have tested whether overexpression of STAT3 could overcome
 GRIM-19-dependent repression. In this experiment, STAT3 and GRIM-19 were
 coexpressed with the reporter in
 STAT3 – / – cells
 ( 18 ) to avoid any contribution
 of endogenous STAT3. As expected, GRIM-19 inhibited the IL-6-induced
 STAT3-dependent expression of the reporter and increasing doses of STAT3
 overcame the inhibition ( Fig.
 3 C ). In a complementary experiment, we compared the
 effect of IL-6 in cells transfected with empty vector pTKO1 or expressing
 antisense GRIM-19 ( Fig.
 3 D ). IL-6 induced the reporter significantly more in
 cells expressing antisense GRIM-19 than in control pTKO1 cells. GRIM-19
 expression was suppressed strongly in cells expressing antisense GRIM-19
 ( Fig. 3 E ). There was
 no difference in STAT3 expression in these cells
 ( Fig. 3 F ).

Because IL-6 also induces STAT1 in some cell types
 ( 30 ), it is unclear from these
 experiments whether these inhibitory effects are directed entirely toward
 STAT3-dependent transcription. To test this point, S3-Luc was transfected into
 STAT1 – / – mouse embryonic
 fibroblasts, and the effect of GRIM-19 on the luciferase gene was measured.
 IL-6 induced the luciferase reporter normally, and this induction was
 inhibited by GRIM-19 ( Fig.
 3 G ). These results rule out the possibility that STAT1 is
 involved in this repression. We next tested the effect of GRIM-19 on
 STAT1-inducible expression through the pIRE. In this experiment, STAT1 was
 coexpressed with the pIRE-Luc reporter, and the cells were treated with
 IFN-γ. In parallel, we studied the effect of coexpressed GRIM-19 on
 luciferase expression ( Fig.
 3 H ). As expected, STAT1 coexpression permitted a robust
 IFN-γ-dependent induction of the reporter, which was not repressed by
 GRIM-19. On the contrary, a stimulatory effect of GRIM-19 was seen. These data
 show an exclusive negative regulatory effect of GRIM-19 on STAT3-dependent
 gene expression.

To further demonstrate the negative effects of GRIM-19, we measured the
 expression of endogenous STAT3-regulated genes in human hTERT-HME cells stably
 expressing a control vector (pLEGFPN1), the WT, or the Y705F mutant of STAT3.
 Two separate experiments were performed. In the first, the empty vector pCXN2
 or the same vector expressing GRIM-19
 ( 14 ) was introduced into the
 cells, using the Fugene 6 reagent. Total RNA was prepared, and Northern
 analysis was performed for the expression of the STAT3-regulated genes cyclin B1 and cdc2 ( Fig.
 3 I ). Expression of these genes was strongly up-regulated
 in WT cells compared with control vector transfected cells. The Y705F mutant
 failed to induce these two genes. The cdc2 probe detected two mRNAs (1.8 and
 1.6 kb), and both were induced by STAT3. In contrast to the pCXN2 control,
 GRIM-19 expression substantially (≈90% of the control) inhibited the
 STAT3-induced expression of cyclin B1 and cdc2 mRNAs. GRIM-19 had no effect on
 GAPDH mRNA expression. Importantly, even basal expression was inhibited by
 GRIM-19. The Y705F mutant of STAT3 failed to induce these mRNAs, and GRIM-19
 had no effect. The difference between WT and Y705F cells does not appear to be
 caused by a variation in STAT3 protein expression
 ( Fig. 3 I Bottom ). The results shown in Fig.
 3 I were confirmed in a second experiment using luciferase
 reporters driven by the native cyclin B1
 ( Fig. 3 J ) or cdc2
 ( Fig. 3 K ) promoters.
 Basal and WT STAT3-dependent induction of these reporters was strongly ablated
 by GRIM-19. As expected, the Y705F mutant did not induce the reporters
 strongly and GRIM-19 had no effect. A similar inhibition of the expression of
 endogenous STAT3-dependent genes BcL2 and BcL-X L was observed in MCF-7 cells stably
 transfected with GRIM-19 (data not shown).

GRIM-19 Does Not Inhibit the Activation or DNA Binding of STAT3. In
 light of the negative regulatory effects of GRIM-19 on STAT3-inducible gene
 expression, we next examined whether GRIM-19 blocked the activation and DNA
 binding of STAT3 in response to IL-6. MCF-7 cells stably expressing GRIM-19
 were exposed to IL-6 for various times, and a Western analysis of cell
 extracts was performed with phospho-specific STAT3 antibodies. Both serine and
 tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3 increased after IL-6 treatment. However, in
 response to IL-6, no significant difference in the tyrosine or serine
 phosphorylation of STAT3 was observed between the control and
 GRIM-19-expressing cells ( Fig. 4 A and B ). As expected, there was no difference in the
 steady-state levels of STAT3 in these cells
 ( Fig. 4 C ). Thus,
 GRIM-19 does not prevent STAT3 activation. We next examined nuclear extracts
 for the DNA binding of STAT3 by using EMSA
 ( Fig. 4 C ). Again,
 there was no significant difference in the ability of STAT3 to bind to the
 STAT3-responsive element between cells expressing GRIM-19 or controls. The
 identity of the EMSA band was established by supershifting this complex with
 STAT3 antibodies and by the failure of a mutant STAT3-responsive element to
 compete with the WT sequence (data not shown). We also confirmed the stable
 overexpression of GRIM-19 in the nuclear extracts
 ( Fig. 4 D ). As
 expected, more STAT3 migrated to the nucleus in IL-6-treated cells, compared
 with untreated cells. However, there was no significant difference in the
 amount of STAT3 in the nuclear extracts, whether the cells overexpressed
 GRIM-19 or not ( Fig.
 4 F ). Antibodies against c-Jun were used to probe these
 nuclear extracts, as an internal control
 ( Fig. 4 G ). c-Jun was
 constitutively present in the nuclei of both cell types. To test whether
 GRIM-19 interferes with DNA binding further, IL-6-treated nuclear extracts
 were incubated with recombinant GRIM-19 before EMSAs
 ( Fig. 4 H ). No
 inhibition of DNA binding was observed, compared with the control
 ( Fig. 4 H , compare
 lanes 3 and 4). GRIM-19 itself did not form any complex with the probe
 ( Fig. 4 H , compare
 lanes 1 and 2). These results show that the negative effects of GRIM-19 are
 not caused by inhibition of the nuclear translocation of STAT3 or interference
 with its binding to DNA.

GRIM-19 Binding to STAT3 Requires the TAD and the Ser-727 Residue. Because GRIM-19 inhibits STAT3-inducible gene expression without significantly
 altering its activation, we next determined which region of STAT3 is targeted
 by GRIM-19. Several STAT3 mutants, each lacking specific functional modules
 ( Fig. 5 A ), were
 generated. These mutants were transfected into
 STAT3 – / – cells to avoid any
 interference from endogenous STAT3, and the cell extracts were
 immunoprecipitated with GRIM-19-specific antibodies. The IP products were
 analyzed by the Western method and probed with antibody to the flag epitope
 tag. As shown in Fig.
 5 B , all mutants were expressed equivalently. WT STAT3
 bound to GRIM-19 normally. However, any deletion extending beyond the TAD
 prevented the co-IP of STAT3 with GRIM-19
 ( Fig. 5 C ). Lastly,
 STAT3DB, a mutant that fails to bind to DNA
 ( 16 ), but not the TAD mutant,
 bound to GRIM-19 similarly to WT STAT3
 ( Fig. 5 E ). These
 observations indicate that the STAT3 TAD is critical for GRIM-19 binding.

The STAT3 TAD bears a serine at residue 727, which is critical for optimal
 transactivation ( 31 , 32 ). Because GRIM-19 requires
 the STAT3 TAD for binding, we studied the impact of S727 mutation on this
 process. Substitution mutants bearing an alanine or a phosphomimetic glutamic
 acid residue at residue 727 were cotransfected with GRIM-19 into
 STAT3 – / – cells
 ( Fig. 6 A ). The S727A
 mutant lost almost 95% of GRIM-19 binding capacity compared with the WT
 protein. The S727E mutant bound to GRIM-19 normally, indicating the importance
 of a negative charge at this site for an efficient interaction. The
 differences in binding were not caused by differential expression of STAT3,
 because all mutants were expressed similarly
 ( Fig. 6 B ).

Discussion

Transcription factor STAT3
 ( 31 , 32 ) is central to several
 diverse biological activities in mammalian cells including cytokine-induced
 responses, differentiation, embryonic growth, and cell survival
 ( 33 ). In normal cells, its
 activity is tightly regulated by feedback inhibitory mechanisms that prevent
 excessive signaling. In contrast, constitutive activation of STAT3 promotes
 the growth of cells transformed by viruses, oncogenes, and autocrine growth
 factors ( 15 , 34 ). Two distinct types of
 proteins, the suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) proteins
 ( 35 ) and protein inhibitor of
 activated STAT3 (PIAS3) ( 36 ),
 inhibit activated STAT3. The SOCS proteins inhibit the Janus tyrosine kinases
 (JAKs) and cause postinduction inhibition of the ligand-induced responses, and
 PIAS3 inhibits the DNA binding of STAT3
 ( 36 ). However, recent studies
 indicate that SOCS proteins do not inhibit constitutively active STAT3
 ( 37 ). Although described as
 specific inhibitors of STAT proteins
 ( 36 ), the PIAS proteins have
 been shown now to act as transcriptional coactivators with steroid receptors
 ( 38 ) and appear to act as
 small ubiquitin-like modifier 1 ligases
 ( 39 , 40 ) in the context of other
 transcription factors. More recent studies suggest that they have a more
 important role to play in steroid signaling than in JAK-STAT signaling
 ( 41 ). A poorly defined third
 mechanism of STAT3 inhibition is its dephosphorylation, through an unspecified
 STAT3-tyrosine-specific phosphatase
 ( 33 ). In light of the multiple
 physiological roles played by STAT3, no single mechanism is likely to account
 fully for the regulation of its activity.

In our attempts to define molecular mechanisms involved in IFN/RA-induced
 antitumor actions, we identified the gene product GRIM-19
 ( 14 ). Although unremarkable
 from the point of its structural relationship to other apoptotic proteins,
 GRIM-19 caused apoptosis when overexpressed. Its nuclear and cytoplasmic
 distribution and the punctuate staining patterns observed in cells prompted us
 to suspect that GRIM-19 might interact with various protein(s) or protein
 complexes to regulate cellular responses. Indeed, a subsequent study
 ( 42 ) has shown that GRIM-19 is
 also a subunit of the mitochondrial NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase
 (respiratory complex I). More recently, we have shown that the viral
 oncoproteins vIRF1 of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpes virus and E6 of
 high-risk human papilloma viruses interact with GRIM-19 and down-regulate its
 apoptotic functions ( 43 ). In
 the current article, we show that GRIM-19 binds to STAT3 and inhibits
 transcription.

Because normal tyrosine and serine phosphorylation of STAT3 occurs even in
 the presence of overexpressed GRIM-19 ( Fig.
 4 A – C ), receptor-proximal events involved
 in STAT3 activation are not interfered with. This characteristic distinguishes
 GRIM-19 from the SOCS proteins
 ( 35 ). Because there was no
 decrease in tyrosine or serine phosphorylation of STAT3 in GRIM-19-expressing
 cells, phosphatase activities are not likely to be involved in its anti-STAT3
 action. EMSAs with nuclear extracts showed clearly that neither the DNA
 binding nor the ligand-induced nuclear translocation of STAT3 are inhibited in
 the presence of GRIM-19 ( Fig. 4 D and H ). In this respect, GRIM-19 differs from protein
 inhibitor of activated STAT3, which interferes with the DNA binding of STAT3
 ( 36 ). Mutational analysis
 shows that GRIM-19 binding to STAT3 requires the TAD
 ( Fig. 5 ). A STAT3 mutant
 defective in DNA binding still interacted with GRIM-19. Consistent with this
 finding, we observed an inhibition of STAT3-dependent transcription upon
 coexpression of GRIM-19. Conversely, STAT3-dependent transcription was
 significantly higher in cells expressing antisense GRIM-19, compared with the
 controls. Similarly, the STAT3-induced expression of cyclin B1 and cdc2 genes
 was inhibited in the presence of GRIM-19
 ( Fig. 3 J – L ). Inhibition of these genes can
 suppress cell growth. STAT3 also promotes the expression of antiapoptotic
 mitochondrial regulators of permeability, such as Bcl-XL and Bcl II
 ( 44 , 45 ). It is conceivable that
 down-regulation of these antiapoptotic proteins in conjunction with other
 proapoptotic regulators might further damage mitochondria, leading to
 disruption of oxidative phosphorylation, where GRIM-19 is present in complex
 I, and releases additional GRIM-19 into the cytoplasm, thus potentially
 amplifying apoptotic responses.

Remarkably, among several members of the STAT family, GRIM-19 binds only to
 STAT3 ( Fig. 2 H – J ). We have also shown that
 STAT1-dependent transcription is not inhibited by GRIM-19
 ( Fig. 3 H ). Because
 STAT1 is critical for IFN-induced responses and GRIM-19 is an IFN/RA-induced
 gene product, it would be counterproductive for GRIM-19 to inhibit its
 upstream regulator. In this respect GRIM-19 differs from the SOCS proteins,
 which inhibit their own inducers
 ( 35 ). Prolonged exposure of
 the GRIM-19 IP blots showed a weak interaction with STAT1α and
 STAT1β (data not shown), suggesting that the weak interaction of GRIM-19
 occurs outside the TAD of STAT1. This weak interaction does not appear to be
 inhibitory and even seems to stimulate transcription. Lastly, the weak binding
 of GRIM-19 to STAT1α and STAT1β does not appear to be caused by the
 ability of STAT1 to form heterodimers with STAT3, because this interaction is
 also seen in STAT3 – / – cells (data
 not shown). A previous report has shown no substantial difference in the
 transactivating capabilities of the STATs, because STAT1 functions can be
 driven equivalently by TADs of other STATs
 ( 46 ). However, with respect to
 inhibition, the STAT3 TAD differs from other STAT TADs on the basis of our
 results. Therefore, it is possible that specific inhibitors of other STAT TADs
 exist. However, thus far, we have not found any homologues of GRIM-19, but we
 cannot rule out the possibility of functional homologues. Because GRIM-19
 homologues are present in all vertebrates, Drosophila , and Caenorhabditis elegans ( 14 , 42 ), STAT inhibition by
 GRIM-19 may be a universal phenomenon. Lastly, a chimeric protein with the
 STAT3-TAD fused to the GAL4-DBD failed to bind to GRIM-19, suggesting that the
 TAD alone is insufficient for this interaction (data not shown). Therefore, in
 addition to the TAD, the primary high-affinity binding site, a secondary
 low-affinity site formed by the folding of STAT3 may be required for binding
 to GRIM-19. In the absence of the TAD, the secondary site itself may not bind
 GRIM-19 tightly. This possibility is hinted at by the S727A mutant, which
 retains residual binding to GRIM-19. Alternatively, another protein may
 mediate the interaction of GRIM-19 with the secondary site, which requires the
 engagement of GRIM-19 with the TAD.

While these results were being prepared for publication, a study appeared
 describing the anti-STAT3 activity of GRIM-19
 ( 47 ). There are several major
 differences between our report and that of Lufei et al. ( 47 ), who have argued that
 GRIM-19 binds to the coiled-coil, DNA binding, and linker domains of STAT3. In
 contrast, our study shows that the STAT3 TAD is the primary target of GRIM-19.
 Conclusions drawn by Lufei et al. were based on STAT3 and GRIM-19
 overexpression in COS-1 cells. Such experiments do not rule out the
 possibility that these interactions are mediated through the
 heterodimerization of mutant and endogenous STAT3. We have conducted the
 interaction studies in STAT3 – / – cells, where the role of endogenous STAT3 in mediating GRIM-19 interactions
 can be excluded. That said, we have also obtained similar results with
 STAT3 + / + and HeLa cells (data not shown),
 indicating that the behavior of
 STAT3 – / – cells is not
 idiosyncratic. Similarly, GRIM-19 exerted negative effects on epidermal growth
 factor-induced gene expression through STAT3 (data not shown), indicating that
 its effects are not inducer-specific. Because STAT3 phosphorylation, nuclear
 localization, and DNA binding are not different in GRIM-19-overexpressing
 cells ( Fig. 4 ), we believe that
 the failure of STAT3 to translocate to the nucleus, as reported by Lufei et al. , appears be an artifact of overexpression. We have shown
 clearly that S727 of STAT3 plays an important role in GRIM-19 binding because
 a mutation of this residue nearly eliminates binding
 ( Fig. 6 ).

Our study has identified a cell growth inhibitory mechanism used by
 biologic therapeutic agents. Our results may also relate to the anti-STAT3
 effects of IFN-α observed in some clinical studies
 ( 48 ). STAT3 joins a group of
 IFN-inhibited pro-growth transcription factors, which until now comprised
 c-myc ( 49 ) and E2F
 ( 50 ), although very different
 mechanisms of inhibition are involved in each case.
