---
pmid: '15494558'
title: ACCUMULATION OF PHOTOSYSTEM ONE1, a member of a novel gene family, is required
  for accumulation of [4Fe-4S] cluster-containing chloroplast complexes and antenna
  proteins.
authors:
- Amann K
- Lezhneva L
- Wanner G
- Herrmann RG
- Meurer J
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC527200
doi: 10.1105/tpc.104.024935
---

# ACCUMULATION OF PHOTOSYSTEM ONE1, a member of a novel gene family, is required for accumulation of [4Fe-4S] cluster-containing chloroplast complexes and antenna proteins.
**Authors:** Amann K, Lezhneva L, Wanner G, Herrmann RG, Meurer J
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.104.024935](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.104.024935)
**PMC:** [PMC527200](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC527200/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2004 Nov;16(11):3084-97. doi: 10.1105/tpc.104.024935. Epub 2004
Oct  19.

ACCUMULATION OF PHOTOSYSTEM ONE1, a member of a novel gene family, is required 
for accumulation of [4Fe-4S] cluster-containing chloroplast complexes and 
antenna proteins.

Amann K(1), Lezhneva L, Wanner G, Herrmann RG, Meurer J.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Department Biologie I, Botanik, 80638 
Munich, Germany.

To investigate the nuclear-controlled mechanisms of [4Fe-4S] cluster assembly in 
chloroplasts, we selected Arabidopsis thaliana mutants with a decreased content 
of photosystem I (PSI) containing three [4Fe-4S] clusters. One identified gene, 
ACCUMULATION OF PHOTOSYSTEM ONE1 (APO1), belongs to a previously unknown gene 
family with four defined groups (APO1 to APO4) only found in nuclear genomes of 
vascular plants. All homologs contain two related motifs of approximately 100 
amino acid residues that could potentially provide ligands for [4Fe-4S] 
clusters. APO1 is essentially required for photoautotrophic growth, and levels 
of PSI core subunits are below the limit of detection in the apo1 mutant. Unlike 
other Arabidopsis PSI mutants, apo1 fails to accumulate significant amounts of 
the outer antenna subunits of PSI and PSII and to form grana stacks. In 
particular, APO1 is essentially required for stable accumulation of other 
plastid-encoded and nuclear-encoded [4Fe-4S] cluster complexes within the 
chloroplast, whereas [2Fe-2S] cluster-containing complexes appear to be 
unaffected. In vivo labeling experiments and analyses of polysome association 
suggest that translational elongation of the PSI transcripts psaA and psaB is 
specifically arrested in the mutant. Taken together, our findings suggest that 
APO1 is involved in the stable assembly of several [4Fe-4S] cluster-containing 
complexes of chloroplasts and interferes with translational events probably in 
association with plastid nucleoids.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.104.024935
PMCID: PMC527200
PMID: 15494558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

To investigate the nuclear-controlled mechanisms of [4Fe-4S] cluster assembly in chloroplasts, we selected Arabidopsis thaliana mutants with a decreased content of photosystem I (PSI) containing three [4Fe-4S] clusters. One identified gene, ACCUMULATION OF PHOTOSYSTEM ONE1 ( APO1 ), belongs to a previously unknown gene family with four defined groups ( APO1 to APO4 ) only found in nuclear genomes of vascular plants. All homologs contain two related motifs of ∼100 amino acid residues that could potentially provide ligands for [4Fe-4S] clusters. APO1 is essentially required for photoautotrophic growth, and levels of PSI core subunits are below the limit of detection in the apo1 mutant. Unlike other Arabidopsis PSI mutants, apo1 fails to accumulate significant amounts of the outer antenna subunits of PSI and PSII and to form grana stacks. In particular, APO1 is essentially required for stable accumulation of other plastid-encoded and nuclear-encoded [4Fe-4S] cluster complexes within the chloroplast, whereas [2Fe-2S] cluster–containing complexes appear to be unaffected. In vivo labeling experiments and analyses of polysome association suggest that translational elongation of the PSI transcripts psaA and psaB is specifically arrested in the mutant. Taken together, our findings suggest that APO1 is involved in the stable assembly of several [4Fe-4S] cluster–containing complexes of chloroplasts and interferes with translational events probably in association with plastid nucleoids.

INTRODUCTION

Photosystem I (PSI) mediates light-driven electron transfer from plastocyanin to ferredoxin and is involved in light energy conversion by balancing linear and cyclic electron transport ( Chitnis, 2001 ; Munekage et al., 2002 ). The two proteins PsaA and PsaB form the heterodimer of the PSI reaction center that binds pairs of the primary electron donor and acceptor chlorophylls (P700 and A 0 , respectively), the phylloquinone A 1 , and the [4Fe-4S] cluster F x . Two additional [4Fe-4S] clusters, which are bound to the plastid-encoded PsaC, transfer the electrons from F x to ferredoxin. The remaining chlorophyll molecules bound to the core complex and to the outer antenna proteins LhcA1 to LhcA4 are involved in light absorbing and energy transfer ( Golbeck, 2003 ). The three-dimensional structures of the cyanobacterial and the plant PSI have been resolved at 2.5 and 4.4 Å resolution, respectively ( Jordan et al., 2001 ; Ben-Shem et al., 2003 ). In higher plants the core complex comprises 15 subunits that are assembled together with the cofactors in a complex and concerted manner. The functions of several subunits have been identified ( Scheller et al., 2001 ).

It is widely accepted that posttranscriptional processes represent important regulatory steps in the accumulation of thylakoid membrane complexes ( Leon et al., 1998 ; Barkan and Goldschmidt-Clermont, 2000 ). Translation, cotranslational insertion of proteins into photosynthetic membranes, and cofactor assembly are proposed to be coordinately regulated and probably enable fine tuning of photosystem adjustment as a response to tissue-specific, developmental, and environmental signals ( Stern et al., 1997 ; Goldschmidt-Clermont, 1998 ; Merchant and Dreyfuss, 1998 ). Inhibitory mechanisms in darkness and/or activation of translation in light couple plastid protein synthesis to light supply ( Bruick and Mayfield, 1999 ).

Supply of chlorophyll and [4Fe-4S] clusters is essential for the stable accumulation of reaction center proteins in higher plants ( Eichacker et al., 1990 ; Mullet et al., 1990 ; Kim et al., 1994 ; Lezhneva et al., 2004 ). However, in cyanobacteria the presence of the three [4Fe-4S] clusters is not required for the biosynthesis of trimeric P700-A 1 cores ( Shen et al., 2002 ). Little is known about the biogenesis of Fe-S clusters in the chloroplast as compared with that in eubacteria and mitochondria (reviewed in Beinert et al., 2000 ; Lill and Kispal, 2000 ; Frazzon and Dean, 2003 ). Conserved chloroplast NIFS (nitrogen fixation subunit S) and NFU (NIFU-like protein) proteins are involved in the activation of sulfur from l -Cys and in the assembly of [2Fe-2S] clusters, respectively ( Pilon-Smits et al., 2002 ; Léon et al., 2003 ; Touraine et al., 2004 ; Yabe et al., 2004 ). Members of the universally conserved FSC ([4Fe-4S] cluster; HCF101) protein family appear to be specifically required for the assembly of [4Fe-4S] clusters not only in the chloroplast but presumably also in other cellular compartments like mitochondria, the cytoplasm, and the nucleus ( Lezhneva et al., 2004 ).

According to the evolutionary origin from free living cyanobacteria, plastids have retained the basic eubacterially derived ribosomal machinery, and many genes that have been transferred from the endosymbiont to the nucleus encode basic ribosomal components ( Sugiura et al., 1998 ). Plastid mRNA binding proteins have been identified, but their precise roles in translational processes often remain to be elucidated ( Fedoroff, 2002 ).

Genetic studies mainly performed in Synechocystis , Chlamydomonas reinhardtii , maize ( Zea mays ), and Arabidopsis thaliana provided evidence for the nuclear control of plastid translation ( McCormac and Barkan, 1999 ; Rattanachaikunsopon et al., 1999 ; Zerges, 2000 ; Cohen et al., 2001 ; Dauvillée et al., 2003 ). The function and composition of trans -acting regulatory factors involved in translation changed during genome–plastome coevolution. This came along with alterations of their target sites often found to be located in the 5′ untranslated region ( Bruick and Mayfield, 1999 ). Combined genetic and transplastomic approaches uncovered that chloroplast translation in Chlamydomonas is coupled with the assembly of thylakoid membrane complexes, the so-called CES (controlled by epistasy of synthesis) process ( Stampacchia et al., 1997 ; Choquet and Wollman, 2002 ; Wostrikoff et al., 2004 ). However, the sublocalization of translational events within the chloroplast as well as the nuclear-controlled mechanisms of cofactor incorporation during translation or the assembly process of the photosynthetic complexes remain to be elucidated.

We aimed to genetically dissect the specific nuclear control of PSI biogenesis and identified a nuclear-encoded factor, ACCUMULATION OF PHOTOSYSTEM ONE1 (APO1), that is required for accumulation of PSI and other plastid-encoded and nuclear-encoded [4Fe-4S] cluster proteins of the chloroplast. Members of the APO gene family are only found in vascular plants so far and are predicted to be localized in chloroplasts and mitochondria. All homologs contain a highly conserved region spanning ∼100 amino acid residues (APO motif 1) that is repeated at the C terminus (APO motif 2). The two motifs are separated by a nonconserved spacer of variable length. Each of the groups, APO1 to APO4, displays distinct and conserved features suggesting that they are all important for the plant cell and possess related functions in different cellular compartments.
