---
pmid: '25585578'
title: FBH1 influences DNA replication fork stability and homologous recombination
  through ubiquitylation of RAD51.
authors:
- Chu WK
- Payne MJ
- Beli P
- Hanada K
- Choudhary C
- Hickson ID
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ncomms6931
---

# FBH1 influences DNA replication fork stability and homologous recombination through ubiquitylation of RAD51.
**Authors:** Chu WK, Payne MJ, Beli P, Hanada K, Choudhary C, Hickson ID
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncomms6931](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms6931)

## Abstract

1. Nat Commun. 2015 Jan 14;6:5931. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6931.

FBH1 influences DNA replication fork stability and homologous recombination 
through ubiquitylation of RAD51.

Chu WK(1), Payne MJ(2), Beli P(3), Hanada K(2), Choudhary C(3), Hickson ID(1).

Author information:
(1)1] Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John 
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK [2] Center for Healthy Aging, Department 
of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, 
Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.
(2)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John 
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.
(3)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of 
Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.

Unscheduled homologous recombination (HR) can lead to genomic instability, which 
greatly increases the threat of neoplastic transformation in humans. The F-box 
DNA helicase 1 (FBH1) is a 3'-5' DNA helicase with a putative function as a 
negative regulator of HR. It is the only known DNA helicase to contain an F-box, 
suggesting that one of its functions is to act as a ubiquitin ligase as part of 
an SCF (SKP1, CUL1 and F-box) complex. Here we report that the central player in 
HR, RAD51, is ubiquitylated by the SCF(FBH1) complex. Expression of an 
ubiquitylation-resistant form of RAD51 in human cells leads to 
hyperrecombination, as well as several phenotypes indicative of an altered 
response to DNA replication stress. These effects are likely to be mediated by 
the enhanced nuclear matrix association of the ubiquitylation-resistant RAD51. 
These data are consistent with FBH1 acting as a negative regulator of RAD51 
function in human cells.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms6931
PMID: 25585578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
