---
pmid: '15577914'
title: Regulation of cellular response to oncogenic and oxidative stress by Seladin-1.
authors:
- Wu C
- Miloslavskaya I
- Demontis S
- Maestro R
- Galaktionov K
journal: Nature
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature03173
---

# Regulation of cellular response to oncogenic and oxidative stress by Seladin-1.
**Authors:** Wu C, Miloslavskaya I, Demontis S, Maestro R, Galaktionov K
**Journal:** Nature (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature03173](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03173)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2004 Dec 2;432(7017):640-5. doi: 10.1038/nature03173.

Regulation of cellular response to oncogenic and oxidative stress by Seladin-1.

Wu C(1), Miloslavskaya I, Demontis S, Maestro R, Galaktionov K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Expression of multiple oncogenes and inactivation of tumour suppressors is 
required to transform primary mammalian cells into cancer cells. Activated 
Ha-RasV12 (Ras) is usually associated with cancer, but it also produces 
paradoxical premature senescence in primary cells by inducing reactive oxygen 
species followed by accumulation of tumour suppressors p53 and p16(INK4a) (ref. 
4). Here we identify, using a direct genetic screen, Seladin-1 (also known as 
Dhcr24) as a key mediator of Ras-induced senescence. Following oncogenic and 
oxidative stress, Seladin-1 binds p53 amino terminus and displaces E3 ubiquitin 
ligase Mdm2 from p53, thus resulting in p53 accumulation. Additionally, 
Seladin-1 associates with Mdm2 independently of p53, potentially affecting other 
Mdm2 targets. Ablation of Seladin-1 causes the bypass of Ras-induced senescence 
in rodent and human fibroblasts, and allows Ras to transform these cells. 
Wild-type Seladin-1, but not mutants that disrupt its association with either 
p53 or Mdm2, suppresses the transformed phenotype. The same mutants are also 
inactive in directing p53-dependent oxidative stress response. These results 
show an unanticipated role for Seladin-1, previously implicated in Alzheimer's 
disease and cholesterol metabolism, in integrating cellular response to 
oncogenic and oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.1038/nature03173
PMID: 15577914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
