---
pmid: '9590172'
title: Disruption of the Jak1 gene demonstrates obligatory and nonredundant roles
  of the Jaks in cytokine-induced biologic responses.
authors:
- Rodig SJ
- Meraz MA
- White JM
- Lampe PA
- Riley JK
- Arthur CD
- King KL
- Sheehan KC
- Yin L
- Pennica D
- Johnson EM Jr
- Schreiber RD
journal: Cell
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81166-6
---

# Disruption of the Jak1 gene demonstrates obligatory and nonredundant roles of the Jaks in cytokine-induced biologic responses.
**Authors:** Rodig SJ, Meraz MA, White JM, Lampe PA, Riley JK, Arthur CD, King KL, Sheehan KC, Yin L, Pennica D, Johnson EM Jr, Schreiber RD
**Journal:** Cell (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81166-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81166-6)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1998 May 1;93(3):373-83. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81166-6.

Disruption of the Jak1 gene demonstrates obligatory and nonredundant roles of 
the Jaks in cytokine-induced biologic responses.

Rodig SJ(1), Meraz MA, White JM, Lampe PA, Riley JK, Arthur CD, King KL, Sheehan 
KC, Yin L, Pennica D, Johnson EM Jr, Schreiber RD.

Author information:
(1)Center for Immunology and Department of Pathology, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Herein we report the generation of mice lacking the ubiquitously expressed Janus 
kinase, Jak1. Jak1-/- mice are runted at birth, fail to nurse, and die 
perinatally. Although Jak1-/- cells are responsive to many cytokines, they fail 
to manifest biologic responses to cytokines that bind to three distinct families 
of cytokine receptors. These include all class II cytokine receptors, cytokine 
receptors that utilize the gamma(c) subunit for signaling, and the family of 
cytokine receptors that depend on the gp130 subunit for signaling. Our results 
thus demonstrate that Jak1 plays an essential and nonredundant role in promoting 
biologic responses induced by a select subset of cytokine receptors, including 
those in which Jak utilization was thought to be nonspecific.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81166-6
PMID: 9590172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
