---
pmid: '8662591'
title: Differential activation of acute phase response factor/STAT3 and STAT1 via
  the cytoplasmic domain of the interleukin 6 signal transducer gp130. I. Definition
  of a novel phosphotyrosine motif mediating STAT1 activation.
authors:
- Gerhartz C
- Heesel B
- Sasse J
- Hemmann U
- Landgraf C
- Schneider-Mergener J
- Horn F
- Heinrich PC
- Graeve L
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC11872477
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.22.12991
---

# Differential activation of acute phase response factor/STAT3 and STAT1 via the cytoplasmic domain of the interleukin 6 signal transducer gp130. I. Definition of a novel phosphotyrosine motif mediating STAT1 activation.
**Authors:** Gerhartz C, Heesel B, Sasse J, Hemmann U, Landgraf C, Schneider-Mergener J, Horn F, Heinrich PC, Graeve L
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.22.12991](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.22.12991)
**PMC:** [PMC11872477](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11872477/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 May 31;271(22):12991-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.22.12991.

Differential activation of acute phase response factor/STAT3 and STAT1 via the 
cytoplasmic domain of the interleukin 6 signal transducer gp130. I. Definition 
of a novel phosphotyrosine motif mediating STAT1 activation.

Gerhartz C(1), Heesel B, Sasse J, Hemmann U, Landgraf C, Schneider-Mergener J, 
Horn F, Heinrich PC, Graeve L.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische Hochschule 
Aachen, 52057 Aachen, Germany.

Interleukin-6 (IL-6) and gamma-interferon (IFNgamma) activate an overlapping set 
of genes via the Jak/STAT pathway. However, at least in human cells, a 
differential activation of STAT transcription factors was observed: IL-6 
activates both acute phase response factor (APRF)/STAT3 and STAT1, whereas 
IFNgamma leads only to STAT1 activation. All STATs cloned so far contain SH2 
domains. Since all cytokine receptors using the Jak/STAT pathway were found to 
be tyrosine-phosphorylated after ligand binding, it has been proposed that 
specific phosphotyrosine modules within the cytoplasmic domain of the receptor 
chains recruit different STAT factors. We have analyzed by mutational studies 
and by phosphopeptide competition assays which of the tyrosine modules of the 
IL-6 signal transducer gp130 are capable of recruiting either APRF or STAT1. We 
found that two of the four tyrosine modules that are important for APRF 
activation also activate STAT1. For these modules, we propose the new consensus 
sequence YXPQ. We further present evidence that STAT1 is activated independently 
from APRF suggesting that gp130 contains multiple independent STAT binding 
sites. We compare the APRF and STAT1 activation motifs of gp130 with the STAT1 
activation motif of the IFNgamma receptor and demonstrate that the specificity 
of activation can be changed from APRF to STAT1 and vice versa by only two point 
mutations within a tyrosine module. These data strongly support the concept that 
the activation of a specific STAT is determined mainly by the phosphotyrosine 
module. The significance of these findings for other receptor systems is 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.22.12991
PMID: 8662591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Upon cytokine binding, cytokine-receptors undergo a transition from a monomeric inactive state to a dimeric or multimeric active state (1). Recent developments in synthetic biology have introduced antibodies as cytokine modulators, representing a promising class of therapeutic biomolecules (2, 3). Additionally, CAR T-cell therapy, an approved treatment for severe acute lymphatic leukemia (4), exemplifies the successful application of synthetic receptors using antibody fragments for tumor antigen recognition (5).

We have developed a first generation synthetic cytokine receptor (SyCyR1st) system, comprising nanobody-based (6) cytokine receptors and soluble protein dimers that serve as ligands (7). This system originally uses nanobodies recognizing GFP or mCherry (8, 9). These nanobodies were derived from Camelidae heavy chain antibodies, which are known for their immunological safety and therapeutic potential (10), this is however not true for the dimeric GFP/mCherry ligands which might provoke antibody responses after repeated in vivo applications (11).

To enhance the system's applicability and achieve the objective of generating a ligand–receptor pair capable of activating STAT3 signaling, we designed second-generation SyCyRs (SyCyR2nd) using nonimmunogenic synthetic ligands based on antibody–antiidiotypic nanobody pairs (12, 13). In this configuration, the antiidiotypic nanobody is fused to the transmembrane and intracellular domain of the receptor of interest. The development of these tailor-made SyCyR systems presents exciting possibilities for enhancing CAR T-cell therapies (14). By engineering receptors capable of modulating CAR T-cell activity, we might provide a valuable tool for fine-tuning cellular responses like enhancing T-cell activation (15) or overcoming T-cell exhaustion (16). A critical factor in this modulation is the role of juxtamembrane amino acids of the synthetic receptor connecting the transmembrane and the extracellular domain, which significantly influence the signaling activity of gp130 (17) and other synthetic receptor systems, such as generalized extracellular molecule sensors (18). Therefore, we engineered the short extracellular stalk region in SyCyR2nd originally taken from native gp130. By shortening this region, we aimed to increase interaction rigidity and introduce a different rotation to the cytoplasmic side of receptors in third generation SyCyRs (SyCyR3rd).

As a ligand for the second and third generation SyCyRs we used variants of palivizumab (19), a humanized monoclonal antibody targeting the respiratory syncytial virus (20) and approved for human use, as nanobody-cytokine receptor pair. This approach enables background-free, cell-type-specific activation of SyCyRs, since palivizumab has no targets in humans and hence only engineered cells are affected. Our SyCyR fusion protein (AIPVHHgp130) can be activated by a reformatted dimeric PscFvFc. Here, the variable domains of palivizumab were engineered as single-chain Fv fragment with sustained binding capacity and specificity, and directly fused to an immunoglobulin (Ig)G1 Fc part to achieve ligand dimerization. Albeit PscFvFc was biologically active, this ligand format has limited therapeutic potential because many such fusion proteins are only stable for a few hours or days after their experimental incorporation into human serum (21) and none have been approved to date. It is worth noting that attempts to activate SyCyR2nd using original palivizumab IgG1 were unsuccessful, underscoring the system's complexity and the need for further optimization (12). To engineer a functional SyCyR:palivizumab pair for therapeutic settings, it is therefore crucial to use an antibody format that could be licensed for human applications. Given our initial unsuccessful attempt using the original palivizumab IgG1, we now focused on reengineering the receptor and ligand components to achieve functionality while maintaining suitability for clinical applications. Engineered antibodies exhibit diverse functional characteristics, including antagonistic or agonistic properties. The structural rigidity of the hinge region plays a crucial role in determining an antibody's agonistic potential, with more rigid hinge regions typically displaying enhanced agonistic activity (22). This relationship between structural rigidity and functional properties offers opportunities for engineering antibodies with tailored activities for specific applications. To improve palivizumab's functionality as a dimerizer for AIPVHHgp130, we opted for an IgG2 subclass backbone with a rigid hinge region (23). We transferred the variable regions from palivizumab (PIgG1) onto this engineered IgG2 backbone, creating PIgG2.

Taken together, the combination of IgG2-reformatted palivizumab and stalk shortening in SyCyR3rd resulted in effective activation, opening promising opportunities for therapeutic applications using engineered antibodies like PIgG2 to activate SyCyRs on Ba/F3 and primary T-cells.

ResultsEngineering stalk domain deletion variants of the synthetic AIPVHHgp130 receptorsPreviously, we described the generation of four antiidiotypic nanobodies (VHHs) binding to the respiratory syncytial virus IgG1-monoclonal antibody palivizumab with high affinity (12). AIP1-4VHH was genetically fused to a complementary DNA coding for the transmembrane and intracellular domain of gp130 and named AIP1VHHgp130, AIP2VHHgp130, AIP3VHHgp130, and AIP4VHHgp130 (Fig. 1A). Notably, only AIP1VHHgp130 and AIP3VHHgp130 conferred signaling after stimulation with a dimerized single-chain variable fragment (scFv) derived from palivizumab (PscFvLHFc), whereas full-length palivizumab failed to activate signaling via any of the four AIPVHHgp130 synthetic receptors (12). The architecture of the AIP1-4VHHgp130 receptors, included a six amino acid residue long stalk region (AQGEIE) taken from gp130 to separate the AIPVHH from the transmembrane domain and allow some flexibility in the positioning of AIPVHH. To analyze the effect on signaling of directly positioning the AIPVHH on the membrane, we deleted the complete stalk region in AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk variants (Fig. 1A). Expression of AIPVHHgp130Δstalk proteins on the cell surface of transduced Ba/F3-gp130 cells was shown by flow cytometry against the N-terminal myc-tag (Fig. 1B) and revealed that deletion of the stalk region resulted in higher expression levels compared to the original AIP2-4VHHgp130 variants, but not for AIP1VHHgp130. This might be of importance since the expression levels could influence the concentrations needed for cellular activation and might contribute to the distinct behavior of the receptors on the cells. Ba/F3-gp130 cells are murine pre-B cells, and due to stable expression of gp130, these cells become responsive to hyper-IL-6 (HIL-6, fusion protein of interleukin (IL)-6 and soluble IL-6 receptor α), which induces cell proliferation via JAK/STAT signaling (24). After the introduction of AIPVHHgp130 into Ba/F3-gp130 cells, the proliferation of these cells became dependent on the synthetic ligand PscFvLHFc (12) (schematic Fig. 1A, experiment Fig. 1C). Interestingly, deletion of the stalk region in the AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk rendered the previously inactive synthetic receptor AIP2VHHgp130 into an active state in stably transduced Ba/F3-gp130 cells. As observed previously, PscFvLHFc activated AIP1VHHgp130 (EC50 = 0.15 nM) and AIP3VHHgp130 (EC50 = 39.07 nM) in Ba/F3-gp130 cells, but also activation of AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk (EC50 = 18.31 nM) and AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk (EC50 = 6.07 nM) in Ba/F3-gp130 cells was observed. Whereas AIP2VHHgp130, AIP4VHHgp130, AIP1VHHgp130Δstalk, and AIP4VHHgp130Δstalk were not active after stimulation with PscFvLHFc (Fig. 1C). Subsequently, the same activation pattern was observed for phosphorylated STAT3 of SyCyR expressing Ba/F3-gp130 cells after 45 min stimulation with PscFvLHFc (Figs. 1, D–H and S1). Another downstream signal of gp130, STAT1 (25) was also phosphorylated in both AIP2gp130Δstalk and AIP3gp130Δstalk (Fig. S2). In conclusion, our data showed that editing of AIP-SyCyRs by introducing STALK deletions resulted in the activation of three (AIP1,2,3VHH) instead of only two (AIP1,3VHH) of the four originally described synthetic AIPVHHgp130 cytokine receptors.Figure 1PscFvLH23Fc activates AIPVHHgp130 different than AIPVHHgp130Δstalk. A, schematic illustration of the transformation from AIPVHHgp130 to AIPVHHgp130Δstalk. B, flow cytometric analysis of myc-tagged synthetic receptors on Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1-4VHHgp130 and AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk. C, dose-dependent proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1-4VHHgp130 and AIP1-4VHHgp130 Δstalk in response to PscFvLH23Fc (0.05–300 nM). Proliferation was normalized to HIL-6 (10 ng/ml) induced proliferation for each cell line. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates from one representative experiment out of three. D–F, normalized mean fluorescence intensity of STAT3 phosphorylation in response to PscFvLHFc (5–300 nM) for (D) AIP1VHHgp130, (E) AIP2VHHgp130, (F) AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk, (G) AIP3VHHgp130, and (H) AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates (n = 3). HIL-6, hyper-IL-6; scFV, single-chain variable fragment.Decreasing the linker peptide length in PscFvLHFc sharpened biological activityIn PscFvLHFc, the single-chain Fv fragments with the combination of the variable domains of the light chain at the N terminus and the heavy chain at the C terminus was fused by a flexible peptide linker of 23 amino acid residues to an Fc part of an IgG1 antibody (26) (Fig. 2A). To reduce the linker length flexibility, we derived PscFvLH0Fc by deleting all 23 linker residues from PscFvLHFc. Subsequently we inserted four and eight EAAAK repeats between the scFv and the Fc-tag, which form rigid alpha-helical loops resulting in PscFvLH4Fc and PscFvLH8Fc, respectively (Fig. 2A, complete sequences in Fig. S3). PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc were expressed in Expi293F cells and purified as dimers from the cell supernatants via Protein A affinity chromatography (Fig. S4, A and B). Next, the affinities of captured PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc to soluble AIP2VHH were determined by surface plasmon resonance. AIP2VHH binds PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc with comparable affinities of 20 nM, 14 nM, and 12 nM, respectively (Fig. S5, A–C), which is in good agreement with the previously determined KD of 2.2 nM for AIP2VHH to palivizumab (12). Next, we tested PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc on Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing any of the AIP1-4VHHgp130 or AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk variants for their ability to induce cellular proliferation and STAT3 phosphorylation (schematic Fig. 2A). Dose-dependent stimulation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIPVHHgp130 variants with PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc revealed no induction of cellular proliferation (Fig. 2, B–D, legend in 2B). PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc also failed to induce sustained STAT3 phosphorylation in these cells, as determined by flow cytometry using antibodies directed against phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated STAT3 (Figs. 2E and S6). Of note, stimulation with the synthetic ligands PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing the AIPVHHgp130Δstalk variants showed that all ligands induced cellular proliferation via AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk with EC50s of 26.31 nM, 22.05 nM, and 17.63 nM and PscFvLH8Fc also activated via AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk with an EC50 of 6.954 nM (Fig. 2, B–D). Significantly increased STAT3 phosphorylation was detected for stimulation of AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk with PscFvLH4Fc, as well as AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk, and AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk with PscFvLH8Fc (Fig. 2E). Our data demonstrated that shortening of the linker length between the scFv and N-terminal cysteine of the Fc hinge region shifted the biological activity of the synthetic ligands toward different receptor compositions suggesting that receptor activation capacity is influenced on both sides, the ligand and the receptor. Moreover, the original linker length of 23 amino acid residues in PscFvLHFc appears to be optimal for achieving the broadest activation spectrum of this SyCyR system. While our experimental data did not reveal a systematic activation pattern, and current computational approaches, including AI-driven protein structure prediction, also face significant limitations when modeling complex membrane receptor systems. Although these tools can provide valuable insights for initial design strategies, the development of functional receptor-ligand pairs still requires empirical optimization through systematic experimental testing.Figure 2PscFvLHFc of varying size differentially activate AIPVHHgp130 variants.A, schematic illustration of PscFv with different linker lengths and all SyCyR variants. B–D, dose-dependent proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1-4VHHgp130 and AIP1-4VHHgp130stalk in response to (B) PscFvLH0Fc, (C) PscFvLH4Fc, and (D) PscFvLH8Fc (0.05–300 nM). Proliferation was normalized to HIL-6 (10 ng/ml) induced proliferation for each cell line. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates from one representative experiment out of three. E, normalized mean fluorescence intensity of STAT3 phosphorylation in response to PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc (300 nM) for all AIPVHHgp130 and AIPVHHgp130Δstalk variants. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates (n = 3). HIL-6, hyper-IL-6; scFV, single-chain variable fragment; SyCyR, synthetic cytokine receptor.An engineered IgG2 variant of palivizumab confers biological activity via AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk and AIP3VHHgp130ΔstalkPalivizumab-induced signaling via AIPVHHgp130 was almost undetectable without secondary cross-linking (12). In vivo, antibody-induced cross-linking to achieve synthetic receptor activation would not be possible; therefore, we investigated whether an alternative Ig-backbone might be better suited for synthetic receptor activation. We decided to generate an IgG2 variant of palivizumab, PIgG2 (Fig. 3A, sequence in Fig. S7). Previously, it was shown that the presence of a unique disulfide crossover in human IgG2 variants corresponds with increased agonistic activity on natural receptors such as CD40 (23, 27). The variable region of the light and the heavy chain of palivizumab (for differentiation: PIgG1) was genetically fused to the IgG2 backbone (Fig. 3A). PIgG2 was expressed in Expi293F cells and purified from the cell supernatants via Protein A affinity chromatography (Fig. S4, A and B). Subsequently, we determined the interaction affinities of captured PIgG2 to soluble AIP1-4VHH by surface plasmon resonance. AIP1-4VHH binds PIgG2 with affinities of 0.25 nM, 14 nM, 20 nM, and 11 nM, respectively, which is in good agreement with those previously determined for PIgG1 (Fig. 3, B–E) (12), demonstrating that changing the backbone did not interfere with binding of palivizumab to the antiidiotypic nanobodies.Figure 3Reformatting of palivizumab (PIgG1) into PIgG2maintained binding to AIP1VHH- AIP4VHH.A, schematic illustration of the transformation from PIgG1 to PIgG2 backbone and interaction with SyCyR variants. B–E, surface plasmon resonance (BIAcore) analysis of PIgG2 captured on a Protein A chip with soluble (B) AIP1VHH, (C) AIP2VHH, (D) AIP3VHH, and (E) AIP4VHH as analytes (concentration range: 1.55–400 nM). Sensorgrams show response units (RU) over time (colored lines) with global fit (black lines). Analytes were injected for 120 s with 900 s dissociation time. SyCyR, synthetic cytokine receptor.We compared the biological activity of PIgG1 and PIgG2 on Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing any of the AIP1-4VHHgp130 or AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk variants for their ability to induce cellular proliferation and STAT3 phosphorylation (schematic Fig. 3A). As observed previously, PIgG1 induced a very weak proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP3VHHgp130 but not via the AIP1,2,4VHHgp130 variants (Fig. 4A) (12). Interestingly, stimulation with the IgG2 subclass PIgG2 not only induced proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP3VHHgp130 in a comparable manner as PIgG1, but deletion of the stalk region in AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk resulted in much stronger proliferation of respective Ba/F3-gp130 cells (EC50: 24.35 nM). But what appears to be of greater importance is that deletion of the stalk region in AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk (EC50: 11.25 nM) led to a very strong proliferative response in respective Ba/F3-gp130 cells (Fig. 4B). This was mirrored by determination of dose-dependent ligand-induced STAT3 phosphorylation in all Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing the AIP1-3VHHgp130 or AIP2-3VHHgp130Δstalk variants. Here, significant STAT3 phosphorylation was only achieved by stimulation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk or AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk with the IgG2 subclass of palivizumab (Fig. 4, C–G and Fig. S8). Interestingly, only AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk stimulated with PIgG2 exhibited significant activation of STAT1 signaling (Fig. S9). No STAT3 phosphorylation was, however, observed in Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1VHHgp130, AIP2VHHgp130, or AIP3VHHgp130 stimulated with PIgG2 (Fig. 4, C–G). In conclusion, we show that the engineered IgG2 subclass of palivizumab conferred biological activity specifically after simultaneous modification of the synthetic AIP2VHHgp130 receptor by deletion of the stalk region. Also, productive ligand-receptor pairs were generated in an iterative process of trial and error.Figure 4PIgG2is an effectiveactivator of synthetic AIPVHHgp130 receptors while (PIgG1) is not.A and B, dose-dependent proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1-4VHHgp130 and AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk in response to (A) PIgG1 and (B) PIgG2 (0.05–300 nM). Proliferation was normalized to HIL-6 (10 ng/ml) induced proliferation for each cell line. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates from one representative experiment out of three. C–G, normalized mean fluorescence intensity of STAT3 phosphorylation in response to PIgG2 (5–300 nM) for (C) AIP1VHHgp130, (D) AIP2VHHgp130, (E) AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk, (F) AIP3VHHgp130, and (G) AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates (n = 3). HIL-6, hyper-IL-6.A tetravalent IgG2 palivizumab variant mediates cellular apoptosis via AIP1VHHhFasTo explore the potential for higher-order receptor clustering, we engineered a tetravalent synthetic ligand by adding a second PscFv fragment to the heavy chain of the PIgG2 backbone. This modification resulted in a ligand with four binding sites for AIPs called PscFvPIgG2, potentially enabling receptor tetramerization (Fig. 5A, sequence in Fig. S10). PscFvPIgG2 was expressed in transiently transfected Expi293F cells and purified from the cell supernatants via Protein A affinity chromatography (Fig. S3, A and B). We functionally tested the tetravalent palivizumab variant on the synthetic Fas receptor, which requires at least trimerization for activation (28, 29, 30). The expression of AIP1VHHFas and AIP3VHHFas on the cell surface of Ba/F3-gp130 cells was confirmed by flow cytometry (Fig. 5B). Notably, activation of Fas-induced apoptosis occurred in a dose-dependent manner using the PscFvPIgG2 ligand but not PIgG2 on Ba/F3-gp130-AIP1VHHFas after stimulation for 24 h, while no apoptosis was observed with Ba/F3-gp130-AIP3VHHFas (Fig. 5C). We detected caspase 3/7 activity in Ba/F3-gp130-AIP1VHHFas but not in Ba/F3-gp130-AIP3VHHFas cells after stimulation with PscFvPIgG2 for 6 h. PIgG2 was unable to induce caspase 3/7 activity either via AIP1VHHFas or AIP3VHHFas after stimulation with PscFvPIgG2 for 6 h (Fig. 5D). These findings demonstrate the potential of our engineered ligand to induce higher-order receptor clustering and activating pathways requiring receptor trimerization or tetramerization.Figure 5AIPVHH fusion to hFas efficiently induce cellular apoptosis. A, scheme of tetravalent ligand on the PIgG2 backbone and its activation of trimeric Fas. B, flow cytometric analysis of myc-tagged synthetic receptors on Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1VHHFas and AIP3VHHFas. C, caspase-3/7 activity after 6 h incubation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing (left) AIP1VHHFas or (right) AIP3VHHFas with dimeric PIgG2 or tetrameric PscFvPIgG2 (0.1-100 nM). Controls: untreated or HIL-6 (10 ng/ml) treated cells. D, annexinV and 7-AAD staining of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing (left) AIP1VHHFas or (right) AIP3VHHFas after 24 h incubation with 100 nM PIgG2 or PscFvPIgG2. Controls: untreated, HIL-6 (10 ng/ml) treated, or HIL-6 treated and 70% EtOH washed cells. Analysis was performed by flow cytometry. HIL-6, hyper-IL-6; scFV, single-chain variable fragment.PIgG2-specific activation of SyCyR-modified primary T cells demonstrates therapeutic potentialTo demonstrate the broader applicability of our system, we retrovirally transduced primary mouse T-cells to express either AIP2gp130Δstalk or AIP3gp130Δstalk SyCyRs. Flow cytometric analysis confirmed successful surface expression of both receptor variants (Fig. 6A). We then examined STAT3 activation in CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell populations following 45-min stimulation with 300 nM of PscFvLHFc, PIgG1, or PIgG2. Flow cytometric analysis revealed significant enhancement of STAT3 phosphorylation specifically in cells expressing AIP2gp130Δstalk and AIP3gp130Δstalk when treated with PIgG2, while PIgG1 and PscFvLHFc failed to induce comparable signaling responses (Fig. 6B). These findings validate the selective activation properties of our engineered receptor-ligand system in primary immune cells, highlighting its potential utility for therapeutic applications in immune cell engineering.Figure 6PIgG2 is an effective activator of synthetic AIPVHHgp130Δstalk receptors on primary mouse T-Cells. A, Flow cytometric analysis of myc-tagged synthetic receptors on transduced T-cells expressing AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk and AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk. B, Normalized mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of STAT3 phosphorylation in response to PscFvLH23Fc, PIgG1 and PIgG2 (300 nM) for (left) AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk and (right) AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates (n=3).

Engineering stalk domain deletion variants of the synthetic AIPVHHgp130 receptorsPreviously, we described the generation of four antiidiotypic nanobodies (VHHs) binding to the respiratory syncytial virus IgG1-monoclonal antibody palivizumab with high affinity (12). AIP1-4VHH was genetically fused to a complementary DNA coding for the transmembrane and intracellular domain of gp130 and named AIP1VHHgp130, AIP2VHHgp130, AIP3VHHgp130, and AIP4VHHgp130 (Fig. 1A). Notably, only AIP1VHHgp130 and AIP3VHHgp130 conferred signaling after stimulation with a dimerized single-chain variable fragment (scFv) derived from palivizumab (PscFvLHFc), whereas full-length palivizumab failed to activate signaling via any of the four AIPVHHgp130 synthetic receptors (12). The architecture of the AIP1-4VHHgp130 receptors, included a six amino acid residue long stalk region (AQGEIE) taken from gp130 to separate the AIPVHH from the transmembrane domain and allow some flexibility in the positioning of AIPVHH. To analyze the effect on signaling of directly positioning the AIPVHH on the membrane, we deleted the complete stalk region in AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk variants (Fig. 1A). Expression of AIPVHHgp130Δstalk proteins on the cell surface of transduced Ba/F3-gp130 cells was shown by flow cytometry against the N-terminal myc-tag (Fig. 1B) and revealed that deletion of the stalk region resulted in higher expression levels compared to the original AIP2-4VHHgp130 variants, but not for AIP1VHHgp130. This might be of importance since the expression levels could influence the concentrations needed for cellular activation and might contribute to the distinct behavior of the receptors on the cells. Ba/F3-gp130 cells are murine pre-B cells, and due to stable expression of gp130, these cells become responsive to hyper-IL-6 (HIL-6, fusion protein of interleukin (IL)-6 and soluble IL-6 receptor α), which induces cell proliferation via JAK/STAT signaling (24). After the introduction of AIPVHHgp130 into Ba/F3-gp130 cells, the proliferation of these cells became dependent on the synthetic ligand PscFvLHFc (12) (schematic Fig. 1A, experiment Fig. 1C). Interestingly, deletion of the stalk region in the AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk rendered the previously inactive synthetic receptor AIP2VHHgp130 into an active state in stably transduced Ba/F3-gp130 cells. As observed previously, PscFvLHFc activated AIP1VHHgp130 (EC50 = 0.15 nM) and AIP3VHHgp130 (EC50 = 39.07 nM) in Ba/F3-gp130 cells, but also activation of AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk (EC50 = 18.31 nM) and AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk (EC50 = 6.07 nM) in Ba/F3-gp130 cells was observed. Whereas AIP2VHHgp130, AIP4VHHgp130, AIP1VHHgp130Δstalk, and AIP4VHHgp130Δstalk were not active after stimulation with PscFvLHFc (Fig. 1C). Subsequently, the same activation pattern was observed for phosphorylated STAT3 of SyCyR expressing Ba/F3-gp130 cells after 45 min stimulation with PscFvLHFc (Figs. 1, D–H and S1). Another downstream signal of gp130, STAT1 (25) was also phosphorylated in both AIP2gp130Δstalk and AIP3gp130Δstalk (Fig. S2). In conclusion, our data showed that editing of AIP-SyCyRs by introducing STALK deletions resulted in the activation of three (AIP1,2,3VHH) instead of only two (AIP1,3VHH) of the four originally described synthetic AIPVHHgp130 cytokine receptors.Figure 1PscFvLH23Fc activates AIPVHHgp130 different than AIPVHHgp130Δstalk. A, schematic illustration of the transformation from AIPVHHgp130 to AIPVHHgp130Δstalk. B, flow cytometric analysis of myc-tagged synthetic receptors on Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1-4VHHgp130 and AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk. C, dose-dependent proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1-4VHHgp130 and AIP1-4VHHgp130 Δstalk in response to PscFvLH23Fc (0.05–300 nM). Proliferation was normalized to HIL-6 (10 ng/ml) induced proliferation for each cell line. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates from one representative experiment out of three. D–F, normalized mean fluorescence intensity of STAT3 phosphorylation in response to PscFvLHFc (5–300 nM) for (D) AIP1VHHgp130, (E) AIP2VHHgp130, (F) AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk, (G) AIP3VHHgp130, and (H) AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates (n = 3). HIL-6, hyper-IL-6; scFV, single-chain variable fragment.

Engineering stalk domain deletion variants of the synthetic AIPVHHgp130 receptors

Previously, we described the generation of four antiidiotypic nanobodies (VHHs) binding to the respiratory syncytial virus IgG1-monoclonal antibody palivizumab with high affinity (12). AIP1-4VHH was genetically fused to a complementary DNA coding for the transmembrane and intracellular domain of gp130 and named AIP1VHHgp130, AIP2VHHgp130, AIP3VHHgp130, and AIP4VHHgp130 (Fig. 1A). Notably, only AIP1VHHgp130 and AIP3VHHgp130 conferred signaling after stimulation with a dimerized single-chain variable fragment (scFv) derived from palivizumab (PscFvLHFc), whereas full-length palivizumab failed to activate signaling via any of the four AIPVHHgp130 synthetic receptors (12). The architecture of the AIP1-4VHHgp130 receptors, included a six amino acid residue long stalk region (AQGEIE) taken from gp130 to separate the AIPVHH from the transmembrane domain and allow some flexibility in the positioning of AIPVHH. To analyze the effect on signaling of directly positioning the AIPVHH on the membrane, we deleted the complete stalk region in AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk variants (Fig. 1A). Expression of AIPVHHgp130Δstalk proteins on the cell surface of transduced Ba/F3-gp130 cells was shown by flow cytometry against the N-terminal myc-tag (Fig. 1B) and revealed that deletion of the stalk region resulted in higher expression levels compared to the original AIP2-4VHHgp130 variants, but not for AIP1VHHgp130. This might be of importance since the expression levels could influence the concentrations needed for cellular activation and might contribute to the distinct behavior of the receptors on the cells. Ba/F3-gp130 cells are murine pre-B cells, and due to stable expression of gp130, these cells become responsive to hyper-IL-6 (HIL-6, fusion protein of interleukin (IL)-6 and soluble IL-6 receptor α), which induces cell proliferation via JAK/STAT signaling (24). After the introduction of AIPVHHgp130 into Ba/F3-gp130 cells, the proliferation of these cells became dependent on the synthetic ligand PscFvLHFc (12) (schematic Fig. 1A, experiment Fig. 1C). Interestingly, deletion of the stalk region in the AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk rendered the previously inactive synthetic receptor AIP2VHHgp130 into an active state in stably transduced Ba/F3-gp130 cells. As observed previously, PscFvLHFc activated AIP1VHHgp130 (EC50 = 0.15 nM) and AIP3VHHgp130 (EC50 = 39.07 nM) in Ba/F3-gp130 cells, but also activation of AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk (EC50 = 18.31 nM) and AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk (EC50 = 6.07 nM) in Ba/F3-gp130 cells was observed. Whereas AIP2VHHgp130, AIP4VHHgp130, AIP1VHHgp130Δstalk, and AIP4VHHgp130Δstalk were not active after stimulation with PscFvLHFc (Fig. 1C). Subsequently, the same activation pattern was observed for phosphorylated STAT3 of SyCyR expressing Ba/F3-gp130 cells after 45 min stimulation with PscFvLHFc (Figs. 1, D–H and S1). Another downstream signal of gp130, STAT1 (25) was also phosphorylated in both AIP2gp130Δstalk and AIP3gp130Δstalk (Fig. S2). In conclusion, our data showed that editing of AIP-SyCyRs by introducing STALK deletions resulted in the activation of three (AIP1,2,3VHH) instead of only two (AIP1,3VHH) of the four originally described synthetic AIPVHHgp130 cytokine receptors.Figure 1PscFvLH23Fc activates AIPVHHgp130 different than AIPVHHgp130Δstalk. A, schematic illustration of the transformation from AIPVHHgp130 to AIPVHHgp130Δstalk. B, flow cytometric analysis of myc-tagged synthetic receptors on Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1-4VHHgp130 and AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk. C, dose-dependent proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1-4VHHgp130 and AIP1-4VHHgp130 Δstalk in response to PscFvLH23Fc (0.05–300 nM). Proliferation was normalized to HIL-6 (10 ng/ml) induced proliferation for each cell line. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates from one representative experiment out of three. D–F, normalized mean fluorescence intensity of STAT3 phosphorylation in response to PscFvLHFc (5–300 nM) for (D) AIP1VHHgp130, (E) AIP2VHHgp130, (F) AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk, (G) AIP3VHHgp130, and (H) AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates (n = 3). HIL-6, hyper-IL-6; scFV, single-chain variable fragment.

PscFvLH23Fc activates AIPVHHgp130 different than AIPVHHgp130Δstalk. A, schematic illustration of the transformation from AIPVHHgp130 to AIPVHHgp130Δstalk. B, flow cytometric analysis of myc-tagged synthetic receptors on Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1-4VHHgp130 and AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk. C, dose-dependent proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1-4VHHgp130 and AIP1-4VHHgp130 Δstalk in response to PscFvLH23Fc (0.05–300 nM). Proliferation was normalized to HIL-6 (10 ng/ml) induced proliferation for each cell line. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates from one representative experiment out of three. D–F, normalized mean fluorescence intensity of STAT3 phosphorylation in response to PscFvLHFc (5–300 nM) for (D) AIP1VHHgp130, (E) AIP2VHHgp130, (F) AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk, (G) AIP3VHHgp130, and (H) AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates (n = 3). HIL-6, hyper-IL-6; scFV, single-chain variable fragment.

Decreasing the linker peptide length in PscFvLHFc sharpened biological activityIn PscFvLHFc, the single-chain Fv fragments with the combination of the variable domains of the light chain at the N terminus and the heavy chain at the C terminus was fused by a flexible peptide linker of 23 amino acid residues to an Fc part of an IgG1 antibody (26) (Fig. 2A). To reduce the linker length flexibility, we derived PscFvLH0Fc by deleting all 23 linker residues from PscFvLHFc. Subsequently we inserted four and eight EAAAK repeats between the scFv and the Fc-tag, which form rigid alpha-helical loops resulting in PscFvLH4Fc and PscFvLH8Fc, respectively (Fig. 2A, complete sequences in Fig. S3). PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc were expressed in Expi293F cells and purified as dimers from the cell supernatants via Protein A affinity chromatography (Fig. S4, A and B). Next, the affinities of captured PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc to soluble AIP2VHH were determined by surface plasmon resonance. AIP2VHH binds PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc with comparable affinities of 20 nM, 14 nM, and 12 nM, respectively (Fig. S5, A–C), which is in good agreement with the previously determined KD of 2.2 nM for AIP2VHH to palivizumab (12). Next, we tested PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc on Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing any of the AIP1-4VHHgp130 or AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk variants for their ability to induce cellular proliferation and STAT3 phosphorylation (schematic Fig. 2A). Dose-dependent stimulation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIPVHHgp130 variants with PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc revealed no induction of cellular proliferation (Fig. 2, B–D, legend in 2B). PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc also failed to induce sustained STAT3 phosphorylation in these cells, as determined by flow cytometry using antibodies directed against phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated STAT3 (Figs. 2E and S6). Of note, stimulation with the synthetic ligands PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing the AIPVHHgp130Δstalk variants showed that all ligands induced cellular proliferation via AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk with EC50s of 26.31 nM, 22.05 nM, and 17.63 nM and PscFvLH8Fc also activated via AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk with an EC50 of 6.954 nM (Fig. 2, B–D). Significantly increased STAT3 phosphorylation was detected for stimulation of AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk with PscFvLH4Fc, as well as AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk, and AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk with PscFvLH8Fc (Fig. 2E). Our data demonstrated that shortening of the linker length between the scFv and N-terminal cysteine of the Fc hinge region shifted the biological activity of the synthetic ligands toward different receptor compositions suggesting that receptor activation capacity is influenced on both sides, the ligand and the receptor. Moreover, the original linker length of 23 amino acid residues in PscFvLHFc appears to be optimal for achieving the broadest activation spectrum of this SyCyR system. While our experimental data did not reveal a systematic activation pattern, and current computational approaches, including AI-driven protein structure prediction, also face significant limitations when modeling complex membrane receptor systems. Although these tools can provide valuable insights for initial design strategies, the development of functional receptor-ligand pairs still requires empirical optimization through systematic experimental testing.Figure 2PscFvLHFc of varying size differentially activate AIPVHHgp130 variants.A, schematic illustration of PscFv with different linker lengths and all SyCyR variants. B–D, dose-dependent proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1-4VHHgp130 and AIP1-4VHHgp130stalk in response to (B) PscFvLH0Fc, (C) PscFvLH4Fc, and (D) PscFvLH8Fc (0.05–300 nM). Proliferation was normalized to HIL-6 (10 ng/ml) induced proliferation for each cell line. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates from one representative experiment out of three. E, normalized mean fluorescence intensity of STAT3 phosphorylation in response to PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc (300 nM) for all AIPVHHgp130 and AIPVHHgp130Δstalk variants. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates (n = 3). HIL-6, hyper-IL-6; scFV, single-chain variable fragment; SyCyR, synthetic cytokine receptor.

Decreasing the linker peptide length in PscFvLHFc sharpened biological activity

In PscFvLHFc, the single-chain Fv fragments with the combination of the variable domains of the light chain at the N terminus and the heavy chain at the C terminus was fused by a flexible peptide linker of 23 amino acid residues to an Fc part of an IgG1 antibody (26) (Fig. 2A). To reduce the linker length flexibility, we derived PscFvLH0Fc by deleting all 23 linker residues from PscFvLHFc. Subsequently we inserted four and eight EAAAK repeats between the scFv and the Fc-tag, which form rigid alpha-helical loops resulting in PscFvLH4Fc and PscFvLH8Fc, respectively (Fig. 2A, complete sequences in Fig. S3). PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc were expressed in Expi293F cells and purified as dimers from the cell supernatants via Protein A affinity chromatography (Fig. S4, A and B). Next, the affinities of captured PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc to soluble AIP2VHH were determined by surface plasmon resonance. AIP2VHH binds PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc with comparable affinities of 20 nM, 14 nM, and 12 nM, respectively (Fig. S5, A–C), which is in good agreement with the previously determined KD of 2.2 nM for AIP2VHH to palivizumab (12). Next, we tested PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc on Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing any of the AIP1-4VHHgp130 or AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk variants for their ability to induce cellular proliferation and STAT3 phosphorylation (schematic Fig. 2A). Dose-dependent stimulation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIPVHHgp130 variants with PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc revealed no induction of cellular proliferation (Fig. 2, B–D, legend in 2B). PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc also failed to induce sustained STAT3 phosphorylation in these cells, as determined by flow cytometry using antibodies directed against phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated STAT3 (Figs. 2E and S6). Of note, stimulation with the synthetic ligands PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing the AIPVHHgp130Δstalk variants showed that all ligands induced cellular proliferation via AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk with EC50s of 26.31 nM, 22.05 nM, and 17.63 nM and PscFvLH8Fc also activated via AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk with an EC50 of 6.954 nM (Fig. 2, B–D). Significantly increased STAT3 phosphorylation was detected for stimulation of AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk with PscFvLH4Fc, as well as AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk, and AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk with PscFvLH8Fc (Fig. 2E). Our data demonstrated that shortening of the linker length between the scFv and N-terminal cysteine of the Fc hinge region shifted the biological activity of the synthetic ligands toward different receptor compositions suggesting that receptor activation capacity is influenced on both sides, the ligand and the receptor. Moreover, the original linker length of 23 amino acid residues in PscFvLHFc appears to be optimal for achieving the broadest activation spectrum of this SyCyR system. While our experimental data did not reveal a systematic activation pattern, and current computational approaches, including AI-driven protein structure prediction, also face significant limitations when modeling complex membrane receptor systems. Although these tools can provide valuable insights for initial design strategies, the development of functional receptor-ligand pairs still requires empirical optimization through systematic experimental testing.Figure 2PscFvLHFc of varying size differentially activate AIPVHHgp130 variants.A, schematic illustration of PscFv with different linker lengths and all SyCyR variants. B–D, dose-dependent proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1-4VHHgp130 and AIP1-4VHHgp130stalk in response to (B) PscFvLH0Fc, (C) PscFvLH4Fc, and (D) PscFvLH8Fc (0.05–300 nM). Proliferation was normalized to HIL-6 (10 ng/ml) induced proliferation for each cell line. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates from one representative experiment out of three. E, normalized mean fluorescence intensity of STAT3 phosphorylation in response to PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc (300 nM) for all AIPVHHgp130 and AIPVHHgp130Δstalk variants. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates (n = 3). HIL-6, hyper-IL-6; scFV, single-chain variable fragment; SyCyR, synthetic cytokine receptor.

PscFvLHFc of varying size differentially activate AIPVHHgp130 variants.A, schematic illustration of PscFv with different linker lengths and all SyCyR variants. B–D, dose-dependent proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1-4VHHgp130 and AIP1-4VHHgp130stalk in response to (B) PscFvLH0Fc, (C) PscFvLH4Fc, and (D) PscFvLH8Fc (0.05–300 nM). Proliferation was normalized to HIL-6 (10 ng/ml) induced proliferation for each cell line. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates from one representative experiment out of three. E, normalized mean fluorescence intensity of STAT3 phosphorylation in response to PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, and PscFvLH8Fc (300 nM) for all AIPVHHgp130 and AIPVHHgp130Δstalk variants. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates (n = 3). HIL-6, hyper-IL-6; scFV, single-chain variable fragment; SyCyR, synthetic cytokine receptor.

An engineered IgG2 variant of palivizumab confers biological activity via AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk and AIP3VHHgp130ΔstalkPalivizumab-induced signaling via AIPVHHgp130 was almost undetectable without secondary cross-linking (12). In vivo, antibody-induced cross-linking to achieve synthetic receptor activation would not be possible; therefore, we investigated whether an alternative Ig-backbone might be better suited for synthetic receptor activation. We decided to generate an IgG2 variant of palivizumab, PIgG2 (Fig. 3A, sequence in Fig. S7). Previously, it was shown that the presence of a unique disulfide crossover in human IgG2 variants corresponds with increased agonistic activity on natural receptors such as CD40 (23, 27). The variable region of the light and the heavy chain of palivizumab (for differentiation: PIgG1) was genetically fused to the IgG2 backbone (Fig. 3A). PIgG2 was expressed in Expi293F cells and purified from the cell supernatants via Protein A affinity chromatography (Fig. S4, A and B). Subsequently, we determined the interaction affinities of captured PIgG2 to soluble AIP1-4VHH by surface plasmon resonance. AIP1-4VHH binds PIgG2 with affinities of 0.25 nM, 14 nM, 20 nM, and 11 nM, respectively, which is in good agreement with those previously determined for PIgG1 (Fig. 3, B–E) (12), demonstrating that changing the backbone did not interfere with binding of palivizumab to the antiidiotypic nanobodies.Figure 3Reformatting of palivizumab (PIgG1) into PIgG2maintained binding to AIP1VHH- AIP4VHH.A, schematic illustration of the transformation from PIgG1 to PIgG2 backbone and interaction with SyCyR variants. B–E, surface plasmon resonance (BIAcore) analysis of PIgG2 captured on a Protein A chip with soluble (B) AIP1VHH, (C) AIP2VHH, (D) AIP3VHH, and (E) AIP4VHH as analytes (concentration range: 1.55–400 nM). Sensorgrams show response units (RU) over time (colored lines) with global fit (black lines). Analytes were injected for 120 s with 900 s dissociation time. SyCyR, synthetic cytokine receptor.We compared the biological activity of PIgG1 and PIgG2 on Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing any of the AIP1-4VHHgp130 or AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk variants for their ability to induce cellular proliferation and STAT3 phosphorylation (schematic Fig. 3A). As observed previously, PIgG1 induced a very weak proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP3VHHgp130 but not via the AIP1,2,4VHHgp130 variants (Fig. 4A) (12). Interestingly, stimulation with the IgG2 subclass PIgG2 not only induced proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP3VHHgp130 in a comparable manner as PIgG1, but deletion of the stalk region in AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk resulted in much stronger proliferation of respective Ba/F3-gp130 cells (EC50: 24.35 nM). But what appears to be of greater importance is that deletion of the stalk region in AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk (EC50: 11.25 nM) led to a very strong proliferative response in respective Ba/F3-gp130 cells (Fig. 4B). This was mirrored by determination of dose-dependent ligand-induced STAT3 phosphorylation in all Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing the AIP1-3VHHgp130 or AIP2-3VHHgp130Δstalk variants. Here, significant STAT3 phosphorylation was only achieved by stimulation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk or AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk with the IgG2 subclass of palivizumab (Fig. 4, C–G and Fig. S8). Interestingly, only AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk stimulated with PIgG2 exhibited significant activation of STAT1 signaling (Fig. S9). No STAT3 phosphorylation was, however, observed in Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1VHHgp130, AIP2VHHgp130, or AIP3VHHgp130 stimulated with PIgG2 (Fig. 4, C–G). In conclusion, we show that the engineered IgG2 subclass of palivizumab conferred biological activity specifically after simultaneous modification of the synthetic AIP2VHHgp130 receptor by deletion of the stalk region. Also, productive ligand-receptor pairs were generated in an iterative process of trial and error.Figure 4PIgG2is an effectiveactivator of synthetic AIPVHHgp130 receptors while (PIgG1) is not.A and B, dose-dependent proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1-4VHHgp130 and AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk in response to (A) PIgG1 and (B) PIgG2 (0.05–300 nM). Proliferation was normalized to HIL-6 (10 ng/ml) induced proliferation for each cell line. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates from one representative experiment out of three. C–G, normalized mean fluorescence intensity of STAT3 phosphorylation in response to PIgG2 (5–300 nM) for (C) AIP1VHHgp130, (D) AIP2VHHgp130, (E) AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk, (F) AIP3VHHgp130, and (G) AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates (n = 3). HIL-6, hyper-IL-6.

An engineered IgG2 variant of palivizumab confers biological activity via AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk and AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk

Palivizumab-induced signaling via AIPVHHgp130 was almost undetectable without secondary cross-linking (12). In vivo, antibody-induced cross-linking to achieve synthetic receptor activation would not be possible; therefore, we investigated whether an alternative Ig-backbone might be better suited for synthetic receptor activation. We decided to generate an IgG2 variant of palivizumab, PIgG2 (Fig. 3A, sequence in Fig. S7). Previously, it was shown that the presence of a unique disulfide crossover in human IgG2 variants corresponds with increased agonistic activity on natural receptors such as CD40 (23, 27). The variable region of the light and the heavy chain of palivizumab (for differentiation: PIgG1) was genetically fused to the IgG2 backbone (Fig. 3A). PIgG2 was expressed in Expi293F cells and purified from the cell supernatants via Protein A affinity chromatography (Fig. S4, A and B). Subsequently, we determined the interaction affinities of captured PIgG2 to soluble AIP1-4VHH by surface plasmon resonance. AIP1-4VHH binds PIgG2 with affinities of 0.25 nM, 14 nM, 20 nM, and 11 nM, respectively, which is in good agreement with those previously determined for PIgG1 (Fig. 3, B–E) (12), demonstrating that changing the backbone did not interfere with binding of palivizumab to the antiidiotypic nanobodies.Figure 3Reformatting of palivizumab (PIgG1) into PIgG2maintained binding to AIP1VHH- AIP4VHH.A, schematic illustration of the transformation from PIgG1 to PIgG2 backbone and interaction with SyCyR variants. B–E, surface plasmon resonance (BIAcore) analysis of PIgG2 captured on a Protein A chip with soluble (B) AIP1VHH, (C) AIP2VHH, (D) AIP3VHH, and (E) AIP4VHH as analytes (concentration range: 1.55–400 nM). Sensorgrams show response units (RU) over time (colored lines) with global fit (black lines). Analytes were injected for 120 s with 900 s dissociation time. SyCyR, synthetic cytokine receptor.

Reformatting of palivizumab (PIgG1) into PIgG2maintained binding to AIP1VHH- AIP4VHH.A, schematic illustration of the transformation from PIgG1 to PIgG2 backbone and interaction with SyCyR variants. B–E, surface plasmon resonance (BIAcore) analysis of PIgG2 captured on a Protein A chip with soluble (B) AIP1VHH, (C) AIP2VHH, (D) AIP3VHH, and (E) AIP4VHH as analytes (concentration range: 1.55–400 nM). Sensorgrams show response units (RU) over time (colored lines) with global fit (black lines). Analytes were injected for 120 s with 900 s dissociation time. SyCyR, synthetic cytokine receptor.

We compared the biological activity of PIgG1 and PIgG2 on Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing any of the AIP1-4VHHgp130 or AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk variants for their ability to induce cellular proliferation and STAT3 phosphorylation (schematic Fig. 3A). As observed previously, PIgG1 induced a very weak proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP3VHHgp130 but not via the AIP1,2,4VHHgp130 variants (Fig. 4A) (12). Interestingly, stimulation with the IgG2 subclass PIgG2 not only induced proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP3VHHgp130 in a comparable manner as PIgG1, but deletion of the stalk region in AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk resulted in much stronger proliferation of respective Ba/F3-gp130 cells (EC50: 24.35 nM). But what appears to be of greater importance is that deletion of the stalk region in AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk (EC50: 11.25 nM) led to a very strong proliferative response in respective Ba/F3-gp130 cells (Fig. 4B). This was mirrored by determination of dose-dependent ligand-induced STAT3 phosphorylation in all Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing the AIP1-3VHHgp130 or AIP2-3VHHgp130Δstalk variants. Here, significant STAT3 phosphorylation was only achieved by stimulation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk or AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk with the IgG2 subclass of palivizumab (Fig. 4, C–G and Fig. S8). Interestingly, only AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk stimulated with PIgG2 exhibited significant activation of STAT1 signaling (Fig. S9). No STAT3 phosphorylation was, however, observed in Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1VHHgp130, AIP2VHHgp130, or AIP3VHHgp130 stimulated with PIgG2 (Fig. 4, C–G). In conclusion, we show that the engineered IgG2 subclass of palivizumab conferred biological activity specifically after simultaneous modification of the synthetic AIP2VHHgp130 receptor by deletion of the stalk region. Also, productive ligand-receptor pairs were generated in an iterative process of trial and error.Figure 4PIgG2is an effectiveactivator of synthetic AIPVHHgp130 receptors while (PIgG1) is not.A and B, dose-dependent proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1-4VHHgp130 and AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk in response to (A) PIgG1 and (B) PIgG2 (0.05–300 nM). Proliferation was normalized to HIL-6 (10 ng/ml) induced proliferation for each cell line. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates from one representative experiment out of three. C–G, normalized mean fluorescence intensity of STAT3 phosphorylation in response to PIgG2 (5–300 nM) for (C) AIP1VHHgp130, (D) AIP2VHHgp130, (E) AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk, (F) AIP3VHHgp130, and (G) AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates (n = 3). HIL-6, hyper-IL-6.

PIgG2is an effectiveactivator of synthetic AIPVHHgp130 receptors while (PIgG1) is not.A and B, dose-dependent proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1-4VHHgp130 and AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk in response to (A) PIgG1 and (B) PIgG2 (0.05–300 nM). Proliferation was normalized to HIL-6 (10 ng/ml) induced proliferation for each cell line. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates from one representative experiment out of three. C–G, normalized mean fluorescence intensity of STAT3 phosphorylation in response to PIgG2 (5–300 nM) for (C) AIP1VHHgp130, (D) AIP2VHHgp130, (E) AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk, (F) AIP3VHHgp130, and (G) AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates (n = 3). HIL-6, hyper-IL-6.

A tetravalent IgG2 palivizumab variant mediates cellular apoptosis via AIP1VHHhFasTo explore the potential for higher-order receptor clustering, we engineered a tetravalent synthetic ligand by adding a second PscFv fragment to the heavy chain of the PIgG2 backbone. This modification resulted in a ligand with four binding sites for AIPs called PscFvPIgG2, potentially enabling receptor tetramerization (Fig. 5A, sequence in Fig. S10). PscFvPIgG2 was expressed in transiently transfected Expi293F cells and purified from the cell supernatants via Protein A affinity chromatography (Fig. S3, A and B). We functionally tested the tetravalent palivizumab variant on the synthetic Fas receptor, which requires at least trimerization for activation (28, 29, 30). The expression of AIP1VHHFas and AIP3VHHFas on the cell surface of Ba/F3-gp130 cells was confirmed by flow cytometry (Fig. 5B). Notably, activation of Fas-induced apoptosis occurred in a dose-dependent manner using the PscFvPIgG2 ligand but not PIgG2 on Ba/F3-gp130-AIP1VHHFas after stimulation for 24 h, while no apoptosis was observed with Ba/F3-gp130-AIP3VHHFas (Fig. 5C). We detected caspase 3/7 activity in Ba/F3-gp130-AIP1VHHFas but not in Ba/F3-gp130-AIP3VHHFas cells after stimulation with PscFvPIgG2 for 6 h. PIgG2 was unable to induce caspase 3/7 activity either via AIP1VHHFas or AIP3VHHFas after stimulation with PscFvPIgG2 for 6 h (Fig. 5D). These findings demonstrate the potential of our engineered ligand to induce higher-order receptor clustering and activating pathways requiring receptor trimerization or tetramerization.Figure 5AIPVHH fusion to hFas efficiently induce cellular apoptosis. A, scheme of tetravalent ligand on the PIgG2 backbone and its activation of trimeric Fas. B, flow cytometric analysis of myc-tagged synthetic receptors on Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1VHHFas and AIP3VHHFas. C, caspase-3/7 activity after 6 h incubation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing (left) AIP1VHHFas or (right) AIP3VHHFas with dimeric PIgG2 or tetrameric PscFvPIgG2 (0.1-100 nM). Controls: untreated or HIL-6 (10 ng/ml) treated cells. D, annexinV and 7-AAD staining of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing (left) AIP1VHHFas or (right) AIP3VHHFas after 24 h incubation with 100 nM PIgG2 or PscFvPIgG2. Controls: untreated, HIL-6 (10 ng/ml) treated, or HIL-6 treated and 70% EtOH washed cells. Analysis was performed by flow cytometry. HIL-6, hyper-IL-6; scFV, single-chain variable fragment.

A tetravalent IgG2 palivizumab variant mediates cellular apoptosis via AIP1VHHhFas

To explore the potential for higher-order receptor clustering, we engineered a tetravalent synthetic ligand by adding a second PscFv fragment to the heavy chain of the PIgG2 backbone. This modification resulted in a ligand with four binding sites for AIPs called PscFvPIgG2, potentially enabling receptor tetramerization (Fig. 5A, sequence in Fig. S10). PscFvPIgG2 was expressed in transiently transfected Expi293F cells and purified from the cell supernatants via Protein A affinity chromatography (Fig. S3, A and B). We functionally tested the tetravalent palivizumab variant on the synthetic Fas receptor, which requires at least trimerization for activation (28, 29, 30). The expression of AIP1VHHFas and AIP3VHHFas on the cell surface of Ba/F3-gp130 cells was confirmed by flow cytometry (Fig. 5B). Notably, activation of Fas-induced apoptosis occurred in a dose-dependent manner using the PscFvPIgG2 ligand but not PIgG2 on Ba/F3-gp130-AIP1VHHFas after stimulation for 24 h, while no apoptosis was observed with Ba/F3-gp130-AIP3VHHFas (Fig. 5C). We detected caspase 3/7 activity in Ba/F3-gp130-AIP1VHHFas but not in Ba/F3-gp130-AIP3VHHFas cells after stimulation with PscFvPIgG2 for 6 h. PIgG2 was unable to induce caspase 3/7 activity either via AIP1VHHFas or AIP3VHHFas after stimulation with PscFvPIgG2 for 6 h (Fig. 5D). These findings demonstrate the potential of our engineered ligand to induce higher-order receptor clustering and activating pathways requiring receptor trimerization or tetramerization.Figure 5AIPVHH fusion to hFas efficiently induce cellular apoptosis. A, scheme of tetravalent ligand on the PIgG2 backbone and its activation of trimeric Fas. B, flow cytometric analysis of myc-tagged synthetic receptors on Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1VHHFas and AIP3VHHFas. C, caspase-3/7 activity after 6 h incubation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing (left) AIP1VHHFas or (right) AIP3VHHFas with dimeric PIgG2 or tetrameric PscFvPIgG2 (0.1-100 nM). Controls: untreated or HIL-6 (10 ng/ml) treated cells. D, annexinV and 7-AAD staining of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing (left) AIP1VHHFas or (right) AIP3VHHFas after 24 h incubation with 100 nM PIgG2 or PscFvPIgG2. Controls: untreated, HIL-6 (10 ng/ml) treated, or HIL-6 treated and 70% EtOH washed cells. Analysis was performed by flow cytometry. HIL-6, hyper-IL-6; scFV, single-chain variable fragment.

AIPVHH fusion to hFas efficiently induce cellular apoptosis. A, scheme of tetravalent ligand on the PIgG2 backbone and its activation of trimeric Fas. B, flow cytometric analysis of myc-tagged synthetic receptors on Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing AIP1VHHFas and AIP3VHHFas. C, caspase-3/7 activity after 6 h incubation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing (left) AIP1VHHFas or (right) AIP3VHHFas with dimeric PIgG2 or tetrameric PscFvPIgG2 (0.1-100 nM). Controls: untreated or HIL-6 (10 ng/ml) treated cells. D, annexinV and 7-AAD staining of Ba/F3-gp130 cells expressing (left) AIP1VHHFas or (right) AIP3VHHFas after 24 h incubation with 100 nM PIgG2 or PscFvPIgG2. Controls: untreated, HIL-6 (10 ng/ml) treated, or HIL-6 treated and 70% EtOH washed cells. Analysis was performed by flow cytometry. HIL-6, hyper-IL-6; scFV, single-chain variable fragment.

PIgG2-specific activation of SyCyR-modified primary T cells demonstrates therapeutic potentialTo demonstrate the broader applicability of our system, we retrovirally transduced primary mouse T-cells to express either AIP2gp130Δstalk or AIP3gp130Δstalk SyCyRs. Flow cytometric analysis confirmed successful surface expression of both receptor variants (Fig. 6A). We then examined STAT3 activation in CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell populations following 45-min stimulation with 300 nM of PscFvLHFc, PIgG1, or PIgG2. Flow cytometric analysis revealed significant enhancement of STAT3 phosphorylation specifically in cells expressing AIP2gp130Δstalk and AIP3gp130Δstalk when treated with PIgG2, while PIgG1 and PscFvLHFc failed to induce comparable signaling responses (Fig. 6B). These findings validate the selective activation properties of our engineered receptor-ligand system in primary immune cells, highlighting its potential utility for therapeutic applications in immune cell engineering.Figure 6PIgG2 is an effective activator of synthetic AIPVHHgp130Δstalk receptors on primary mouse T-Cells. A, Flow cytometric analysis of myc-tagged synthetic receptors on transduced T-cells expressing AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk and AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk. B, Normalized mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of STAT3 phosphorylation in response to PscFvLH23Fc, PIgG1 and PIgG2 (300 nM) for (left) AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk and (right) AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates (n=3).

PIgG2-specific activation of SyCyR-modified primary T cells demonstrates therapeutic potential

To demonstrate the broader applicability of our system, we retrovirally transduced primary mouse T-cells to express either AIP2gp130Δstalk or AIP3gp130Δstalk SyCyRs. Flow cytometric analysis confirmed successful surface expression of both receptor variants (Fig. 6A). We then examined STAT3 activation in CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell populations following 45-min stimulation with 300 nM of PscFvLHFc, PIgG1, or PIgG2. Flow cytometric analysis revealed significant enhancement of STAT3 phosphorylation specifically in cells expressing AIP2gp130Δstalk and AIP3gp130Δstalk when treated with PIgG2, while PIgG1 and PscFvLHFc failed to induce comparable signaling responses (Fig. 6B). These findings validate the selective activation properties of our engineered receptor-ligand system in primary immune cells, highlighting its potential utility for therapeutic applications in immune cell engineering.Figure 6PIgG2 is an effective activator of synthetic AIPVHHgp130Δstalk receptors on primary mouse T-Cells. A, Flow cytometric analysis of myc-tagged synthetic receptors on transduced T-cells expressing AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk and AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk. B, Normalized mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of STAT3 phosphorylation in response to PscFvLH23Fc, PIgG1 and PIgG2 (300 nM) for (left) AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk and (right) AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates (n=3).

PIgG2 is an effective activator of synthetic AIPVHHgp130Δstalk receptors on primary mouse T-Cells. A, Flow cytometric analysis of myc-tagged synthetic receptors on transduced T-cells expressing AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk and AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk. B, Normalized mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of STAT3 phosphorylation in response to PscFvLH23Fc, PIgG1 and PIgG2 (300 nM) for (left) AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk and (right) AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk. Data represent mean ± S.D. of three biological replicates (n=3).

DiscussionIn this study, we engineered antibody-formats based on palivizumab in structure, but capable of activating a series of SyCyRs. These SyCyRs are engineered receptors designed to respond to specific synthetic ligands, allowing precise control of cellular signaling in engineered cells. The versatility of SyCyRs has been demonstrated through their successful integration with various intracellular signaling domains, including those derived from TNF, Fas, gp130, IFNAR, IL-12Rβ1, and IL-23 receptors (31, 32, 33). Our research demonstrated that the spatial configuration of receptors within dimeric complexes significantly influences signaling efficacy. We used two strategies to optimize these parameters: modifying palivizumab-derived ligand proteins with varying linker lengths and enhancing the rigidity and rotation of intracellular domains in receptor-ligand interactions.While cytokimeras (34, 35), cytokine mimetics (36, 37), synthekines (5, 38), and fusokines (39, 40) represent innovative cytokine engineering approaches designed to activate specific cell types based on receptor expression, they cannot exclusively target engineered cells, limiting their specificity in cellular activation. In contrast, our palivizumab-based third generation SyCyR system, activated by engineered antibodies, offers unique advantages in specificity and control by exclusively targeting engineered cells. This opens up possibilities for CAR T-cell therapy, where STAT3 activation promotes effector function-related genes, and other novel gene therapies (41) Furthermore, this system could potentially function as a precise On/Off switch in CARs, enhancing control over T-cell activation different than the unspecific tyrosine kinase inhibitor dasatinib (42). Moreover, when fused to costimulatory intracellular domain such as CD28 (43) 4-1BB, or ICOS (44) it could form part of an AND-Gate logic circuit, allowing for activation only in presence of the engineered antibody (45). While the SynNotch system has been used for similar purposes, it relies on components that are not native to human cells (46). The Fas-mediated apoptosis control offers a potentially safe alternative to current suicide gene approaches like iCASP9 (47) or CD20-transduced T cells and its activator rituximab, which also targets other CD20 expressing cells (48).The use of nanobodies in our SyCyR system offers additional advantages due to their low immunogenicity and the possibility to further humanize them (10, 49). The ability to modulate receptor proximity through antibody engineering presents new opportunities for designing therapeutic antibodies with tailored properties. For example, I-shaped antibodies, which have a more linear structure compared to traditional Y-shaped antibodies, could further enhance signaling efficacy by bringing the receptors closer together, potentially increasing the strength and duration of the signaling response (50).Our study reveals the intricate interplay between receptor structure, ligand design, and signaling outcomes in SyCyR systems. As cell and gene therapies gain wider approval, our technology could be adapted beyond immunotherapy to fields such as regenerative medicine, metabolic disorders, or neurodegenerative diseases, leveraging its modularity and specificity for targeted cellular therapies across various medical conditions.Deleting the stalk region in SyCyRs resulted in altered signaling responses to the originally described and only active palivizumab-variant PscFvLHFc, underscoring the importance of rotation, distance, and rigidity in signaling efficacy. This is important for binding of JAK kinases intracellularly in gp130 (17) and other synthetic receptors, like generalized extracellular molecule sensors (18). It is worth noting that the relative expression of receptors varies for each receptor, and STALK deletion does not affect their expression. However, receptor expression levels do not directly influence downstream signaling, likely due to signal amplification via STAT3. Even a small number of activated receptors can induce significant proliferation and downstream signaling. We were able to activate AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk while AIP2VHHgp130 was previously unresponsive, even though AIP2VHH has similar affinity as AIP3VHH. AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk was more responsive than AIP3VHHgp130 suggesting that rigidity, distance, and spatial orientation or rotation, rather than high affinity are crucial factors for enhanced signaling. The importance of rigidity and distance are underscored by PscFv0Fc and PscFv4Fc disrupting signaling in three of the eight SyCyRs while the longest linker, PscFv8Fc was able to activate two out of eight SyCyRs. This understanding led us to hypothesize that a more rigid backbone might increase the agonism of palivizumab. We decided to use an IgG2 backbone which was shown to be more rigid due to altered disulfate bridges in its hinge region (23). We successfully transferred the PIgG1 variable region to an IgG2 backbone (PIgG2), which maintained similar affinity to AIPs as PIgG1 while showing improved agonistic properties on the same SyCyRs as PscFv8Fc.To induce higher-order receptor clustering, we engineered a tetravalent palivizumab-variant by adding a second PscFv fragment to the PIgG2 heavy chain resulting in PscFvPIgG2. This design was tested on the synthetically engineered Fas receptor fused to AIP1VHH and AIP3VHH, which signals as a trimer (32), successfully activating Fas-induced apoptosis in combination with AIP1VHHFas, similarly to our previous results using PscFvPscFvFc (12) while the dimeric IgG2 variant was unable to do so. Our findings demonstrate the potential of engineered ligands to induce higher-order receptor clustering and activate pathways requiring receptor trimerization or tetramerization.The demonstration of PIgG2-mediated activation in primary mouse T-cells expressing AIP2gp130Δstalk and AIP3gp130Δstalk SyCyRs provides critical validation of this system beyond established cell lines. The selective STAT3 phosphorylation observed in CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells specifically in response to PIgG2, but not PIgG1 or PscFvLHFc, confirms the engineered specificity and functionality of our system in therapeutically relevant primary immune cells.The agonistic behavior of IgG2-reformatted palivizumab proves that antibody engineering can be used as a tool to activate synthetic cytokine signaling pathways. There are numerous IgG2 subclass therapeutic human antibodies approved by the Food and Drug Administration, the first one being approved was the epidermal growth factor receptor binding panitumumab (2006) (51), and the latest one being nemolizumab (2024) (52), an IL-31R-alpha blocker. Since PIgG1 is already Food and Drug Administration-approved, alterations in the backbone could potentially qualify for fast-track approval, although rigorous safety and efficacy testing would still be required but advanced technologies like organ or lab-on-a-chip systems could expedite the process (53).

In this study, we engineered antibody-formats based on palivizumab in structure, but capable of activating a series of SyCyRs. These SyCyRs are engineered receptors designed to respond to specific synthetic ligands, allowing precise control of cellular signaling in engineered cells. The versatility of SyCyRs has been demonstrated through their successful integration with various intracellular signaling domains, including those derived from TNF, Fas, gp130, IFNAR, IL-12Rβ1, and IL-23 receptors (31, 32, 33). Our research demonstrated that the spatial configuration of receptors within dimeric complexes significantly influences signaling efficacy. We used two strategies to optimize these parameters: modifying palivizumab-derived ligand proteins with varying linker lengths and enhancing the rigidity and rotation of intracellular domains in receptor-ligand interactions.

While cytokimeras (34, 35), cytokine mimetics (36, 37), synthekines (5, 38), and fusokines (39, 40) represent innovative cytokine engineering approaches designed to activate specific cell types based on receptor expression, they cannot exclusively target engineered cells, limiting their specificity in cellular activation. In contrast, our palivizumab-based third generation SyCyR system, activated by engineered antibodies, offers unique advantages in specificity and control by exclusively targeting engineered cells. This opens up possibilities for CAR T-cell therapy, where STAT3 activation promotes effector function-related genes, and other novel gene therapies (41) Furthermore, this system could potentially function as a precise On/Off switch in CARs, enhancing control over T-cell activation different than the unspecific tyrosine kinase inhibitor dasatinib (42). Moreover, when fused to costimulatory intracellular domain such as CD28 (43) 4-1BB, or ICOS (44) it could form part of an AND-Gate logic circuit, allowing for activation only in presence of the engineered antibody (45). While the SynNotch system has been used for similar purposes, it relies on components that are not native to human cells (46). The Fas-mediated apoptosis control offers a potentially safe alternative to current suicide gene approaches like iCASP9 (47) or CD20-transduced T cells and its activator rituximab, which also targets other CD20 expressing cells (48).

The use of nanobodies in our SyCyR system offers additional advantages due to their low immunogenicity and the possibility to further humanize them (10, 49). The ability to modulate receptor proximity through antibody engineering presents new opportunities for designing therapeutic antibodies with tailored properties. For example, I-shaped antibodies, which have a more linear structure compared to traditional Y-shaped antibodies, could further enhance signaling efficacy by bringing the receptors closer together, potentially increasing the strength and duration of the signaling response (50).

Our study reveals the intricate interplay between receptor structure, ligand design, and signaling outcomes in SyCyR systems. As cell and gene therapies gain wider approval, our technology could be adapted beyond immunotherapy to fields such as regenerative medicine, metabolic disorders, or neurodegenerative diseases, leveraging its modularity and specificity for targeted cellular therapies across various medical conditions.

Deleting the stalk region in SyCyRs resulted in altered signaling responses to the originally described and only active palivizumab-variant PscFvLHFc, underscoring the importance of rotation, distance, and rigidity in signaling efficacy. This is important for binding of JAK kinases intracellularly in gp130 (17) and other synthetic receptors, like generalized extracellular molecule sensors (18). It is worth noting that the relative expression of receptors varies for each receptor, and STALK deletion does not affect their expression. However, receptor expression levels do not directly influence downstream signaling, likely due to signal amplification via STAT3. Even a small number of activated receptors can induce significant proliferation and downstream signaling. We were able to activate AIP2VHHgp130Δstalk while AIP2VHHgp130 was previously unresponsive, even though AIP2VHH has similar affinity as AIP3VHH. AIP3VHHgp130Δstalk was more responsive than AIP3VHHgp130 suggesting that rigidity, distance, and spatial orientation or rotation, rather than high affinity are crucial factors for enhanced signaling. The importance of rigidity and distance are underscored by PscFv0Fc and PscFv4Fc disrupting signaling in three of the eight SyCyRs while the longest linker, PscFv8Fc was able to activate two out of eight SyCyRs. This understanding led us to hypothesize that a more rigid backbone might increase the agonism of palivizumab. We decided to use an IgG2 backbone which was shown to be more rigid due to altered disulfate bridges in its hinge region (23). We successfully transferred the PIgG1 variable region to an IgG2 backbone (PIgG2), which maintained similar affinity to AIPs as PIgG1 while showing improved agonistic properties on the same SyCyRs as PscFv8Fc.

To induce higher-order receptor clustering, we engineered a tetravalent palivizumab-variant by adding a second PscFv fragment to the PIgG2 heavy chain resulting in PscFvPIgG2. This design was tested on the synthetically engineered Fas receptor fused to AIP1VHH and AIP3VHH, which signals as a trimer (32), successfully activating Fas-induced apoptosis in combination with AIP1VHHFas, similarly to our previous results using PscFvPscFvFc (12) while the dimeric IgG2 variant was unable to do so. Our findings demonstrate the potential of engineered ligands to induce higher-order receptor clustering and activate pathways requiring receptor trimerization or tetramerization.

The demonstration of PIgG2-mediated activation in primary mouse T-cells expressing AIP2gp130Δstalk and AIP3gp130Δstalk SyCyRs provides critical validation of this system beyond established cell lines. The selective STAT3 phosphorylation observed in CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells specifically in response to PIgG2, but not PIgG1 or PscFvLHFc, confirms the engineered specificity and functionality of our system in therapeutically relevant primary immune cells.

The agonistic behavior of IgG2-reformatted palivizumab proves that antibody engineering can be used as a tool to activate synthetic cytokine signaling pathways. There are numerous IgG2 subclass therapeutic human antibodies approved by the Food and Drug Administration, the first one being approved was the epidermal growth factor receptor binding panitumumab (2006) (51), and the latest one being nemolizumab (2024) (52), an IL-31R-alpha blocker. Since PIgG1 is already Food and Drug Administration-approved, alterations in the backbone could potentially qualify for fast-track approval, although rigorous safety and efficacy testing would still be required but advanced technologies like organ or lab-on-a-chip systems could expedite the process (53).

Experimental proceduresCloning of synthetic cytokine ligands and receptorsThe pcDNA3.1 plasmid encoding PscFvLHFc has been previously described (12). We removed the tobacco etch virus proteolytic cleavage site by restriction digest, resulting in the plasmid encoding PscFv0Fc. To create variants with linkers of different lengths, we used complementary oligonucleotide hybridization. For this purpose, phosphorylated oligonucleotides (5′-GGCCGCAGAAGCAGCTGCAAAAGAAGCAGCTGCAAAAGAAGCAGCTGCAAAAGAAGCAGCTGCAAAAGC-3′ and 5′-GGCCGCTTTTGCAGCTGCTTCTTTTGCAGCTGCTTCTTTTGCAGCTGCTTCTTTTGCAGCTGCTTCTGC-3′ or 5′-GGCCGCTGAGGCCGCTGCTAAGGAGGCCGCCGCTAAGGAGGCTGCCGCCAAGGAGGCCGCTGCCAAGGAGGCTGCTGCCAAGGAAGCCGCCGCCAAGGAAGCTGCCGCCAAAGAGGCCGCCGCCAAAGC-3′ and 5′-GGCCGCTTTGGCGGCGGCCTCTTTGGCGGCAGCTTCCTTGGCGGCGGCTTCCTTGGCAGCAGCCTCCTTGGCAGCGGCCTCCTTGGCGGCAGCCTCCTTAGCGGCGGCCTCCTTAGCAGCGGCCTCAGC-3′ for PscFv4Fc and PscFv8Fc, respectively) were resuspended in annealing buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 7.5–8.0, 50 mM NaCl, and 1 mM EDTA) and mixed in equimolar concentrations. The designed primers incorporated NotI overhangs, facilitating subsequent cloning into the hinge region before the Fc tag. This resulted in the pcDNA3.1-Fc vector coding for an N-terminal signal peptide and Myc tag (EQKLISEEDL), and a C-terminal linker of either four or eight EAAAK repetitions followed by a human IgG1-Fc tag, resulting in PscFv4Fc and PscFv8Fc, respectively. For the IgG2 backbone, we obtained primary sequences of IgG2 C232SκC214S described by Orr et al. (23). These sequences were reverse translated and codon optimized. The variable region of palivizumab, derived from the US patent (US6955717B2), was incorporated into the light and heavy constant chains. These chains were separated by an F2A peptide sequence (54) to ensure efficient expression of both chains from a single construct. The complementary DNA was synthesized by BioCat (Heidelberg, Germany). To generate stalk variants of the SyCyRs, we performed deletion PCR using the primers (Primer forward: 5′-GCCATCGTGGTGCCT-3′ Primer reverse: 5′-GAATTTAGGGGTGGTGAAGGT-3′) This PCR strategy resulted in pMOWS-AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk variants.Cells and reagentsThe generation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells was described elsewhere (55). The packaging cell line Phoenix-Eco was received from Ursula Klingmüller (DKFZ). Cell lines were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium high glucose culture medium (GIBCO, Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (GIBCO, Life Technologies), 60 mg/l penicillin, and 100 mg/l streptomycin (Genaxxon bioscience GmbH) at 37 °C with 5% CO2. Proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells was maintained in the presence of 0.2% (10 ng/ml) human HIL-6 (24). Expi-293F cells (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were cultured in Expi293 expression medium without antibiotics until they reached a density of 3 to 5 × 106 cells/ml in a 37 °C incubator with 8% CO2 on an orbital shaker at 125 rpm. Phospho-STAT3 (Tyr705) (#557814), STAT3 (#560391), Phospho-STAT1 (Tyr701) (#612596), STAT1 (#558537), CD28: (#553294) and CD4 antibody (#558107) were obtained from BD Biosciences. Myc (71D10; cat. #2278) antibodies were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology. Rabbit anti-human IgG Fc (#31423) was obtained from Pierce and CD3e antibody was obtained from Invitrogen (#16-0031-86) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated Fab goat anti-rabbit IgG (1:500, cat. #4412) was obtained from Cell Signaling Technology. CD8a antibody was obtained from BioLegend (#100766). rhIL2 (#130-097-745) and Mouse Pan T-cell Isolation Kit (#130-095-130) were obtained from Miltenyi Biotec. Palivizumab antibody was from Synagis.T-cell isolation from micePrimary CD8 and CD4 T cells were isolated from the spleen and lymph node tissues of C57BL/6 mice according to Miltenyi Biotec Pan T-Cell Isolation Kit manufacturer protocol. T cells were activated in the presence of 4 μg/ml anti-CD3 (plate-bound), 1 μg/ml soluble anti-CD28, and 10 U/ml recombinant human IL-2 (rhIL-2) in the T-cell complete medium (RPMI 1640, 10% fetal bovine serum, L-glutamine-penicillin-streptomycin, and 50 μM β-mercaptoethanol). The next day, five million activated T cells were transduced with ecotropic retrovirus in the presence of 8 μg/ml polybrene and 100 U/ml rhIL-2 at 2000 g/min, 37 °C for 1 h. Afterward cells were resuspended in new T-cell medium in the presence of 100 U/ml rhIL-2 for one additional day.Transfection of cellsBa/F3-gp130 cells were retrovirally transduced with the pMOWS expression plasmids coding for AIP1-4VHHgp130 and AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk variants as described in (32). Transduced cells were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium as described above supplemented with 10 ng/ml HIL-6. Selection of transduced Ba/F3-gp130 cells was performed with puromycin (1.5 μg/ml) (Carl Roth) for at least two weeks. Afterward, the generated Ba/F3-gp130 cell lines were analyzed for synthetic receptor cell surface expression via flow cytometry.Mammalian expression and purification of recombinant proteinspcDNA3.1 encoding, PscFvLHFc, PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, PscFvLH8Fc, PIgG2, and PscFvPIgG2 were transfected into Expi-293F cells using ExpiFectamine. Reaching 4.5 to 5.5 × 106 c/ml, the cells were diluted to a final density of 3 × 106c/ml in 30 ml Expi293 expression medium. 30 μg of the plasmid expression vectors were used for transfection according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After 6 days, the culture was harvested by centrifugation at 450g at 4 °C for 5 min, followed by centrifugation of the resulting supernatant at 4000g at 4 °C for 20 min. The supernatant of the second centrifugation step was filtered (0.45 μm, Carl Roth cat. #P667.1) and purified by affinity chromatography. Recombinant proteins containing an Fc-tag were purified using Protein A resin (1 ml, HiTrap MabSelect PrismA) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. The column was washed with 30 column volumes of PBS. Proteins were eluted at pH 3.2 to 3.5 using a 50 mM citric acid buffer. Fractions containing the protein peak were pooled, and the pH was adjusted to pH 7 with 1 M Tris, pH 11. Recombinant proteins containing a C-terminal Twin-Strep-tag were purified using Strep-Tactin resin (IBA cat. #2–5025–001) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All purified proteins were rebuffered to PBS using illustra NAP25 columns (GE HealthCare Life Sciences). Protein concentrations were determined by measuring absorbance at 280 nm, and samples were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Protein quality was assessed by SDS-PAGE, Coomassie brilliant blue staining and functional testing. We obtained 10.5 mg from 90 ml PscFvLHFc, 2.6 mg from 60 ml PscFv0LHFc, 8 mg from 90 ml PscFv4LHFc, 1 mg from 60 ml PscFv8LHFc, 7 mg from 90 ml PIgG2, and 3.5 mg from 90 ml PscFvPIgG2.Surface plasmon resonanceFor surface plasmon resonance experiments, the Biacore X100 instrument (Cytiva Life Sciences) and Protein A sensor chip (Cytiva Life Sciences, # 29127558) were used. PIgG2, PIgG2 and PscFvFc variants were captured to a single flow cell at a level of about 500 response units per cycle. Three samples containing only running buffer were injected over both ligand and reference flow cell, followed by AIP1-4VHH serially diluted from 400 nM to 1.5 nM, with an independent final replicate of 12.5 nM. AIP1-4VHH were injected at a flow rate of 30 μl/min for 120 s, and the dissociation was measured for 900 s. Experiments were carried out at 25 °C in PBS pH 7.4, composed of 137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 12 mM HPO42−/H2PO4−, and 0.05% (v/v) surfactant P20 (GE HealthCare). The resulting data were reference subtracted and fit to a 1:1 binding model using the Biacore X100 Evaluation software (https://www.cytivalifesciences.com/en/us/support/software/biacore-downloads/biacore-x100-software) V 2.0.1.Cell surface detection of AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk via flow cytometryBriefly, 5 × 105 Ba/F3-gp130 cells and variants thereof were washed in fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) buffer (PBS and 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA)) and then incubated in 50 μl of FACS buffer containing primary myc antibody (1:100). After incubation for 1 h at room temperature (RT), cells were washed and resuspended in 50 μl of FACS buffer containing secondary antibody (Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated Fab anti-rabbit IgG 1:500) and incubated for 1 h at RT. Cells were washed and resuspended in 500 μl of FACS buffer and analyzed by flow cytometry (BD FACSCanto II flow cytometer using the FACSDiva software, BD Biosciences, https://www.bdbiosciences.com/en-us/products/software/instrument-software/bd-facsdiva-software). Data analysis was conducted using FlowJo Version 10 (https://www.flowjo.com/solutions/flowjo/downloads) (Tree Star Inc).Proliferation assaysBa/F3-gp130 cells and variants thereof were washed, and 1 × 104 cells were cultured for three days in a final volume of 100 μl in the presence of (synthetic) cytokines and antibodies. The CellTiter-Blue Reagent was used to determine cellular viability by recording the fluorescence (excitation 560 nm and emission 590 nm) using an Infinite M200 PRO plate reader (Tecan) immediately after adding 20 μl of reagent per well (time point 0) and up to 120 min thereafter. All conditions were measured in triplicate per experiment. Fluorescence values were normalized by subtraction of time point 0 values. All experiments were performed at least three times, and one representative experiment was selected.Stimulation of cells and STAT3/pSTAT3 detection by flow cytometryBa/F3-gp130 cells or primary mouse T-cells and variants thereof (106 cells) were washed three times with PBS and starved in serum-free medium for 3 h. Cells were then stimulated with the indicated ligands or antibodies for 45 min (or as specified) in 200 μl in a 96 well plate. Primary T-cells were washed in PBS and subsequently incubated for 15 min with myc antibody on ice. Following a PBS wash, cells were incubated for 15 min with fluorophore-conjugated antibodies against CD4 and CD8 along with Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated secondary antibody targeting the myc antibody. Stained cells were subsequently subjected to phosphorylation analysis. For phosphorylation analysis using flow cytometry, cells were centrifuged (300g, for 5 min), 100 μl of medium was discarded, and the remaining 100 μl of the stimulated cell suspension were mixed with 100 μl of 4% paraformaldehyde and incubated at 37 °C for 10 min. Cells were then centrifuged (300g, 4 °C for 5 min). The resulting cell pellets were resuspended in ice-cold 90% methanol and incubated at −20 °C for 10 min. Subsequently, cells were washed twice with ice-cold BSA-EDTA buffer (1% BSA, 2 mM EDTA in PBS). Cells were then incubated overnight with fluorophore-coupled primary antibodies against STAT1 and STAT3 (1:100 dilution) or phospho-STAT1 (Y701) and phospho-STAT3 (Y705) (1:200 dilution) 2% BSA and 0.5 mM EDTA in PBS. Prior to analysis, cells were washed three times in 1% BSA-EDTA buffer. STAT3 and STAT1 activation was calculated by taking the ratio of the mean fluorescence intensity of total STAT1 or STAT3 to phosphorylated STAT1 (pSTAT1) or phosphorylated STAT3 (pSTAT3), respectively, for each sample; these values were normalized to those obtained with HIL6. Flow cytometry analysis was performed using FACS Canto II (BD Biosciences). Data were analyzed using FlowJo software (version 10.6.1, BD Biosciences).AnnexinV/7-aminoactinomycin D stainingBa/F3-gp130 cell lines were washed three times with PBS. Subsequently, 1.25 × 105 cells were used per well and incubated with the indicated cytokines for 24 h. For the ethanol condition, cells were only incubated with HIL-6 (10 ng/ml). Ethanol treatment replaced the last washing step before the measurement. Cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and if indicated with 70% ethanol. Cells were resuspended in 300 μl Annexin V binding buffer (BD Bioscience) with 0.5 μl Annexin V-PE (ImmunoTools) and incubated for 15 min in the dark at RT. One microliter of 7-aminoactinomycin D (R&D Systems) was added before analysis was carried out by flow cytometry recording 20,000 events.Fluorimetric caspase 3/7 assayBa/F3-gp130 cells were washed three times with PBS. Subsequently, 1.25 × 105 cells were incubated with the indicated cytokines for 6 h in a 96-well plate in a volume of 100 μl. Subsequently, induction of apoptosis was determined using Amplite Fluorimetric Caspase 3/7 Assay kit (AAT Bioquest, Inc) according to manufacturer’s recommendations. In brief, 100 μl of the caspase-3/7 working solution was added to the cells and incubated for 2 h at RT. After centrifugation at 450g for 1 min, the fluorescence (excitation 350 nm, emission 450 nm) using an Infinite M200 PRO plate reader (Tecan) was determined.Statistical analysesFor proliferation assays, a representative experiment of n ≥ three assays with comparable results is displayed. EC50 values were determined using a nonlinear regression analysis with variable slope calculation in GraphPad Prism 8.0 (version 8.0.2 for Windows, GraphPad Software, www.graphpad.com) from three individual experiments. The data are presented as means ± SD. For multiple comparisons, two-way ANOVA including Bonferroni as statistical hypothesis test was used (GraphPad Prism 8.0.2, GraphPad Software Inc.). Statistical significance was set at the level of p < 0.05 (∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗∗p < 0.001).

Experimental procedures

Cloning of synthetic cytokine ligands and receptorsThe pcDNA3.1 plasmid encoding PscFvLHFc has been previously described (12). We removed the tobacco etch virus proteolytic cleavage site by restriction digest, resulting in the plasmid encoding PscFv0Fc. To create variants with linkers of different lengths, we used complementary oligonucleotide hybridization. For this purpose, phosphorylated oligonucleotides (5′-GGCCGCAGAAGCAGCTGCAAAAGAAGCAGCTGCAAAAGAAGCAGCTGCAAAAGAAGCAGCTGCAAAAGC-3′ and 5′-GGCCGCTTTTGCAGCTGCTTCTTTTGCAGCTGCTTCTTTTGCAGCTGCTTCTTTTGCAGCTGCTTCTGC-3′ or 5′-GGCCGCTGAGGCCGCTGCTAAGGAGGCCGCCGCTAAGGAGGCTGCCGCCAAGGAGGCCGCTGCCAAGGAGGCTGCTGCCAAGGAAGCCGCCGCCAAGGAAGCTGCCGCCAAAGAGGCCGCCGCCAAAGC-3′ and 5′-GGCCGCTTTGGCGGCGGCCTCTTTGGCGGCAGCTTCCTTGGCGGCGGCTTCCTTGGCAGCAGCCTCCTTGGCAGCGGCCTCCTTGGCGGCAGCCTCCTTAGCGGCGGCCTCCTTAGCAGCGGCCTCAGC-3′ for PscFv4Fc and PscFv8Fc, respectively) were resuspended in annealing buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 7.5–8.0, 50 mM NaCl, and 1 mM EDTA) and mixed in equimolar concentrations. The designed primers incorporated NotI overhangs, facilitating subsequent cloning into the hinge region before the Fc tag. This resulted in the pcDNA3.1-Fc vector coding for an N-terminal signal peptide and Myc tag (EQKLISEEDL), and a C-terminal linker of either four or eight EAAAK repetitions followed by a human IgG1-Fc tag, resulting in PscFv4Fc and PscFv8Fc, respectively. For the IgG2 backbone, we obtained primary sequences of IgG2 C232SκC214S described by Orr et al. (23). These sequences were reverse translated and codon optimized. The variable region of palivizumab, derived from the US patent (US6955717B2), was incorporated into the light and heavy constant chains. These chains were separated by an F2A peptide sequence (54) to ensure efficient expression of both chains from a single construct. The complementary DNA was synthesized by BioCat (Heidelberg, Germany). To generate stalk variants of the SyCyRs, we performed deletion PCR using the primers (Primer forward: 5′-GCCATCGTGGTGCCT-3′ Primer reverse: 5′-GAATTTAGGGGTGGTGAAGGT-3′) This PCR strategy resulted in pMOWS-AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk variants.

Cloning of synthetic cytokine ligands and receptors

The pcDNA3.1 plasmid encoding PscFvLHFc has been previously described (12). We removed the tobacco etch virus proteolytic cleavage site by restriction digest, resulting in the plasmid encoding PscFv0Fc. To create variants with linkers of different lengths, we used complementary oligonucleotide hybridization. For this purpose, phosphorylated oligonucleotides (5′-GGCCGCAGAAGCAGCTGCAAAAGAAGCAGCTGCAAAAGAAGCAGCTGCAAAAGAAGCAGCTGCAAAAGC-3′ and 5′-GGCCGCTTTTGCAGCTGCTTCTTTTGCAGCTGCTTCTTTTGCAGCTGCTTCTTTTGCAGCTGCTTCTGC-3′ or 5′-GGCCGCTGAGGCCGCTGCTAAGGAGGCCGCCGCTAAGGAGGCTGCCGCCAAGGAGGCCGCTGCCAAGGAGGCTGCTGCCAAGGAAGCCGCCGCCAAGGAAGCTGCCGCCAAAGAGGCCGCCGCCAAAGC-3′ and 5′-GGCCGCTTTGGCGGCGGCCTCTTTGGCGGCAGCTTCCTTGGCGGCGGCTTCCTTGGCAGCAGCCTCCTTGGCAGCGGCCTCCTTGGCGGCAGCCTCCTTAGCGGCGGCCTCCTTAGCAGCGGCCTCAGC-3′ for PscFv4Fc and PscFv8Fc, respectively) were resuspended in annealing buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 7.5–8.0, 50 mM NaCl, and 1 mM EDTA) and mixed in equimolar concentrations. The designed primers incorporated NotI overhangs, facilitating subsequent cloning into the hinge region before the Fc tag. This resulted in the pcDNA3.1-Fc vector coding for an N-terminal signal peptide and Myc tag (EQKLISEEDL), and a C-terminal linker of either four or eight EAAAK repetitions followed by a human IgG1-Fc tag, resulting in PscFv4Fc and PscFv8Fc, respectively. For the IgG2 backbone, we obtained primary sequences of IgG2 C232SκC214S described by Orr et al. (23). These sequences were reverse translated and codon optimized. The variable region of palivizumab, derived from the US patent (US6955717B2), was incorporated into the light and heavy constant chains. These chains were separated by an F2A peptide sequence (54) to ensure efficient expression of both chains from a single construct. The complementary DNA was synthesized by BioCat (Heidelberg, Germany). To generate stalk variants of the SyCyRs, we performed deletion PCR using the primers (Primer forward: 5′-GCCATCGTGGTGCCT-3′ Primer reverse: 5′-GAATTTAGGGGTGGTGAAGGT-3′) This PCR strategy resulted in pMOWS-AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk variants.

Cells and reagentsThe generation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells was described elsewhere (55). The packaging cell line Phoenix-Eco was received from Ursula Klingmüller (DKFZ). Cell lines were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium high glucose culture medium (GIBCO, Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (GIBCO, Life Technologies), 60 mg/l penicillin, and 100 mg/l streptomycin (Genaxxon bioscience GmbH) at 37 °C with 5% CO2. Proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells was maintained in the presence of 0.2% (10 ng/ml) human HIL-6 (24). Expi-293F cells (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were cultured in Expi293 expression medium without antibiotics until they reached a density of 3 to 5 × 106 cells/ml in a 37 °C incubator with 8% CO2 on an orbital shaker at 125 rpm. Phospho-STAT3 (Tyr705) (#557814), STAT3 (#560391), Phospho-STAT1 (Tyr701) (#612596), STAT1 (#558537), CD28: (#553294) and CD4 antibody (#558107) were obtained from BD Biosciences. Myc (71D10; cat. #2278) antibodies were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology. Rabbit anti-human IgG Fc (#31423) was obtained from Pierce and CD3e antibody was obtained from Invitrogen (#16-0031-86) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated Fab goat anti-rabbit IgG (1:500, cat. #4412) was obtained from Cell Signaling Technology. CD8a antibody was obtained from BioLegend (#100766). rhIL2 (#130-097-745) and Mouse Pan T-cell Isolation Kit (#130-095-130) were obtained from Miltenyi Biotec. Palivizumab antibody was from Synagis.

Cells and reagents

The generation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells was described elsewhere (55). The packaging cell line Phoenix-Eco was received from Ursula Klingmüller (DKFZ). Cell lines were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium high glucose culture medium (GIBCO, Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (GIBCO, Life Technologies), 60 mg/l penicillin, and 100 mg/l streptomycin (Genaxxon bioscience GmbH) at 37 °C with 5% CO2. Proliferation of Ba/F3-gp130 cells was maintained in the presence of 0.2% (10 ng/ml) human HIL-6 (24). Expi-293F cells (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were cultured in Expi293 expression medium without antibiotics until they reached a density of 3 to 5 × 106 cells/ml in a 37 °C incubator with 8% CO2 on an orbital shaker at 125 rpm. Phospho-STAT3 (Tyr705) (#557814), STAT3 (#560391), Phospho-STAT1 (Tyr701) (#612596), STAT1 (#558537), CD28: (#553294) and CD4 antibody (#558107) were obtained from BD Biosciences. Myc (71D10; cat. #2278) antibodies were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology. Rabbit anti-human IgG Fc (#31423) was obtained from Pierce and CD3e antibody was obtained from Invitrogen (#16-0031-86) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated Fab goat anti-rabbit IgG (1:500, cat. #4412) was obtained from Cell Signaling Technology. CD8a antibody was obtained from BioLegend (#100766). rhIL2 (#130-097-745) and Mouse Pan T-cell Isolation Kit (#130-095-130) were obtained from Miltenyi Biotec. Palivizumab antibody was from Synagis.

T-cell isolation from micePrimary CD8 and CD4 T cells were isolated from the spleen and lymph node tissues of C57BL/6 mice according to Miltenyi Biotec Pan T-Cell Isolation Kit manufacturer protocol. T cells were activated in the presence of 4 μg/ml anti-CD3 (plate-bound), 1 μg/ml soluble anti-CD28, and 10 U/ml recombinant human IL-2 (rhIL-2) in the T-cell complete medium (RPMI 1640, 10% fetal bovine serum, L-glutamine-penicillin-streptomycin, and 50 μM β-mercaptoethanol). The next day, five million activated T cells were transduced with ecotropic retrovirus in the presence of 8 μg/ml polybrene and 100 U/ml rhIL-2 at 2000 g/min, 37 °C for 1 h. Afterward cells were resuspended in new T-cell medium in the presence of 100 U/ml rhIL-2 for one additional day.

T-cell isolation from mice

Primary CD8 and CD4 T cells were isolated from the spleen and lymph node tissues of C57BL/6 mice according to Miltenyi Biotec Pan T-Cell Isolation Kit manufacturer protocol. T cells were activated in the presence of 4 μg/ml anti-CD3 (plate-bound), 1 μg/ml soluble anti-CD28, and 10 U/ml recombinant human IL-2 (rhIL-2) in the T-cell complete medium (RPMI 1640, 10% fetal bovine serum, L-glutamine-penicillin-streptomycin, and 50 μM β-mercaptoethanol). The next day, five million activated T cells were transduced with ecotropic retrovirus in the presence of 8 μg/ml polybrene and 100 U/ml rhIL-2 at 2000 g/min, 37 °C for 1 h. Afterward cells were resuspended in new T-cell medium in the presence of 100 U/ml rhIL-2 for one additional day.

Transfection of cellsBa/F3-gp130 cells were retrovirally transduced with the pMOWS expression plasmids coding for AIP1-4VHHgp130 and AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk variants as described in (32). Transduced cells were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium as described above supplemented with 10 ng/ml HIL-6. Selection of transduced Ba/F3-gp130 cells was performed with puromycin (1.5 μg/ml) (Carl Roth) for at least two weeks. Afterward, the generated Ba/F3-gp130 cell lines were analyzed for synthetic receptor cell surface expression via flow cytometry.

Transfection of cells

Ba/F3-gp130 cells were retrovirally transduced with the pMOWS expression plasmids coding for AIP1-4VHHgp130 and AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk variants as described in (32). Transduced cells were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium as described above supplemented with 10 ng/ml HIL-6. Selection of transduced Ba/F3-gp130 cells was performed with puromycin (1.5 μg/ml) (Carl Roth) for at least two weeks. Afterward, the generated Ba/F3-gp130 cell lines were analyzed for synthetic receptor cell surface expression via flow cytometry.

Mammalian expression and purification of recombinant proteinspcDNA3.1 encoding, PscFvLHFc, PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, PscFvLH8Fc, PIgG2, and PscFvPIgG2 were transfected into Expi-293F cells using ExpiFectamine. Reaching 4.5 to 5.5 × 106 c/ml, the cells were diluted to a final density of 3 × 106c/ml in 30 ml Expi293 expression medium. 30 μg of the plasmid expression vectors were used for transfection according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After 6 days, the culture was harvested by centrifugation at 450g at 4 °C for 5 min, followed by centrifugation of the resulting supernatant at 4000g at 4 °C for 20 min. The supernatant of the second centrifugation step was filtered (0.45 μm, Carl Roth cat. #P667.1) and purified by affinity chromatography. Recombinant proteins containing an Fc-tag were purified using Protein A resin (1 ml, HiTrap MabSelect PrismA) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. The column was washed with 30 column volumes of PBS. Proteins were eluted at pH 3.2 to 3.5 using a 50 mM citric acid buffer. Fractions containing the protein peak were pooled, and the pH was adjusted to pH 7 with 1 M Tris, pH 11. Recombinant proteins containing a C-terminal Twin-Strep-tag were purified using Strep-Tactin resin (IBA cat. #2–5025–001) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All purified proteins were rebuffered to PBS using illustra NAP25 columns (GE HealthCare Life Sciences). Protein concentrations were determined by measuring absorbance at 280 nm, and samples were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Protein quality was assessed by SDS-PAGE, Coomassie brilliant blue staining and functional testing. We obtained 10.5 mg from 90 ml PscFvLHFc, 2.6 mg from 60 ml PscFv0LHFc, 8 mg from 90 ml PscFv4LHFc, 1 mg from 60 ml PscFv8LHFc, 7 mg from 90 ml PIgG2, and 3.5 mg from 90 ml PscFvPIgG2.

Mammalian expression and purification of recombinant proteins

pcDNA3.1 encoding, PscFvLHFc, PscFvLH0Fc, PscFvLH4Fc, PscFvLH8Fc, PIgG2, and PscFvPIgG2 were transfected into Expi-293F cells using ExpiFectamine. Reaching 4.5 to 5.5 × 106 c/ml, the cells were diluted to a final density of 3 × 106c/ml in 30 ml Expi293 expression medium. 30 μg of the plasmid expression vectors were used for transfection according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After 6 days, the culture was harvested by centrifugation at 450g at 4 °C for 5 min, followed by centrifugation of the resulting supernatant at 4000g at 4 °C for 20 min. The supernatant of the second centrifugation step was filtered (0.45 μm, Carl Roth cat. #P667.1) and purified by affinity chromatography. Recombinant proteins containing an Fc-tag were purified using Protein A resin (1 ml, HiTrap MabSelect PrismA) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. The column was washed with 30 column volumes of PBS. Proteins were eluted at pH 3.2 to 3.5 using a 50 mM citric acid buffer. Fractions containing the protein peak were pooled, and the pH was adjusted to pH 7 with 1 M Tris, pH 11. Recombinant proteins containing a C-terminal Twin-Strep-tag were purified using Strep-Tactin resin (IBA cat. #2–5025–001) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All purified proteins were rebuffered to PBS using illustra NAP25 columns (GE HealthCare Life Sciences). Protein concentrations were determined by measuring absorbance at 280 nm, and samples were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Protein quality was assessed by SDS-PAGE, Coomassie brilliant blue staining and functional testing. We obtained 10.5 mg from 90 ml PscFvLHFc, 2.6 mg from 60 ml PscFv0LHFc, 8 mg from 90 ml PscFv4LHFc, 1 mg from 60 ml PscFv8LHFc, 7 mg from 90 ml PIgG2, and 3.5 mg from 90 ml PscFvPIgG2.

Surface plasmon resonanceFor surface plasmon resonance experiments, the Biacore X100 instrument (Cytiva Life Sciences) and Protein A sensor chip (Cytiva Life Sciences, # 29127558) were used. PIgG2, PIgG2 and PscFvFc variants were captured to a single flow cell at a level of about 500 response units per cycle. Three samples containing only running buffer were injected over both ligand and reference flow cell, followed by AIP1-4VHH serially diluted from 400 nM to 1.5 nM, with an independent final replicate of 12.5 nM. AIP1-4VHH were injected at a flow rate of 30 μl/min for 120 s, and the dissociation was measured for 900 s. Experiments were carried out at 25 °C in PBS pH 7.4, composed of 137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 12 mM HPO42−/H2PO4−, and 0.05% (v/v) surfactant P20 (GE HealthCare). The resulting data were reference subtracted and fit to a 1:1 binding model using the Biacore X100 Evaluation software (https://www.cytivalifesciences.com/en/us/support/software/biacore-downloads/biacore-x100-software) V 2.0.1.

Surface plasmon resonance

For surface plasmon resonance experiments, the Biacore X100 instrument (Cytiva Life Sciences) and Protein A sensor chip (Cytiva Life Sciences, # 29127558) were used. PIgG2, PIgG2 and PscFvFc variants were captured to a single flow cell at a level of about 500 response units per cycle. Three samples containing only running buffer were injected over both ligand and reference flow cell, followed by AIP1-4VHH serially diluted from 400 nM to 1.5 nM, with an independent final replicate of 12.5 nM. AIP1-4VHH were injected at a flow rate of 30 μl/min for 120 s, and the dissociation was measured for 900 s. Experiments were carried out at 25 °C in PBS pH 7.4, composed of 137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 12 mM HPO42−/H2PO4−, and 0.05% (v/v) surfactant P20 (GE HealthCare). The resulting data were reference subtracted and fit to a 1:1 binding model using the Biacore X100 Evaluation software (https://www.cytivalifesciences.com/en/us/support/software/biacore-downloads/biacore-x100-software) V 2.0.1.

Cell surface detection of AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk via flow cytometryBriefly, 5 × 105 Ba/F3-gp130 cells and variants thereof were washed in fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) buffer (PBS and 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA)) and then incubated in 50 μl of FACS buffer containing primary myc antibody (1:100). After incubation for 1 h at room temperature (RT), cells were washed and resuspended in 50 μl of FACS buffer containing secondary antibody (Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated Fab anti-rabbit IgG 1:500) and incubated for 1 h at RT. Cells were washed and resuspended in 500 μl of FACS buffer and analyzed by flow cytometry (BD FACSCanto II flow cytometer using the FACSDiva software, BD Biosciences, https://www.bdbiosciences.com/en-us/products/software/instrument-software/bd-facsdiva-software). Data analysis was conducted using FlowJo Version 10 (https://www.flowjo.com/solutions/flowjo/downloads) (Tree Star Inc).

Cell surface detection of AIP1-4VHHgp130Δstalk via flow cytometry

Briefly, 5 × 105 Ba/F3-gp130 cells and variants thereof were washed in fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) buffer (PBS and 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA)) and then incubated in 50 μl of FACS buffer containing primary myc antibody (1:100). After incubation for 1 h at room temperature (RT), cells were washed and resuspended in 50 μl of FACS buffer containing secondary antibody (Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated Fab anti-rabbit IgG 1:500) and incubated for 1 h at RT. Cells were washed and resuspended in 500 μl of FACS buffer and analyzed by flow cytometry (BD FACSCanto II flow cytometer using the FACSDiva software, BD Biosciences, https://www.bdbiosciences.com/en-us/products/software/instrument-software/bd-facsdiva-software). Data analysis was conducted using FlowJo Version 10 (https://www.flowjo.com/solutions/flowjo/downloads) (Tree Star Inc).

Proliferation assaysBa/F3-gp130 cells and variants thereof were washed, and 1 × 104 cells were cultured for three days in a final volume of 100 μl in the presence of (synthetic) cytokines and antibodies. The CellTiter-Blue Reagent was used to determine cellular viability by recording the fluorescence (excitation 560 nm and emission 590 nm) using an Infinite M200 PRO plate reader (Tecan) immediately after adding 20 μl of reagent per well (time point 0) and up to 120 min thereafter. All conditions were measured in triplicate per experiment. Fluorescence values were normalized by subtraction of time point 0 values. All experiments were performed at least three times, and one representative experiment was selected.

Proliferation assays

Ba/F3-gp130 cells and variants thereof were washed, and 1 × 104 cells were cultured for three days in a final volume of 100 μl in the presence of (synthetic) cytokines and antibodies. The CellTiter-Blue Reagent was used to determine cellular viability by recording the fluorescence (excitation 560 nm and emission 590 nm) using an Infinite M200 PRO plate reader (Tecan) immediately after adding 20 μl of reagent per well (time point 0) and up to 120 min thereafter. All conditions were measured in triplicate per experiment. Fluorescence values were normalized by subtraction of time point 0 values. All experiments were performed at least three times, and one representative experiment was selected.

Stimulation of cells and STAT3/pSTAT3 detection by flow cytometryBa/F3-gp130 cells or primary mouse T-cells and variants thereof (106 cells) were washed three times with PBS and starved in serum-free medium for 3 h. Cells were then stimulated with the indicated ligands or antibodies for 45 min (or as specified) in 200 μl in a 96 well plate. Primary T-cells were washed in PBS and subsequently incubated for 15 min with myc antibody on ice. Following a PBS wash, cells were incubated for 15 min with fluorophore-conjugated antibodies against CD4 and CD8 along with Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated secondary antibody targeting the myc antibody. Stained cells were subsequently subjected to phosphorylation analysis. For phosphorylation analysis using flow cytometry, cells were centrifuged (300g, for 5 min), 100 μl of medium was discarded, and the remaining 100 μl of the stimulated cell suspension were mixed with 100 μl of 4% paraformaldehyde and incubated at 37 °C for 10 min. Cells were then centrifuged (300g, 4 °C for 5 min). The resulting cell pellets were resuspended in ice-cold 90% methanol and incubated at −20 °C for 10 min. Subsequently, cells were washed twice with ice-cold BSA-EDTA buffer (1% BSA, 2 mM EDTA in PBS). Cells were then incubated overnight with fluorophore-coupled primary antibodies against STAT1 and STAT3 (1:100 dilution) or phospho-STAT1 (Y701) and phospho-STAT3 (Y705) (1:200 dilution) 2% BSA and 0.5 mM EDTA in PBS. Prior to analysis, cells were washed three times in 1% BSA-EDTA buffer. STAT3 and STAT1 activation was calculated by taking the ratio of the mean fluorescence intensity of total STAT1 or STAT3 to phosphorylated STAT1 (pSTAT1) or phosphorylated STAT3 (pSTAT3), respectively, for each sample; these values were normalized to those obtained with HIL6. Flow cytometry analysis was performed using FACS Canto II (BD Biosciences). Data were analyzed using FlowJo software (version 10.6.1, BD Biosciences).

Stimulation of cells and STAT3/pSTAT3 detection by flow cytometry

Ba/F3-gp130 cells or primary mouse T-cells and variants thereof (106 cells) were washed three times with PBS and starved in serum-free medium for 3 h. Cells were then stimulated with the indicated ligands or antibodies for 45 min (or as specified) in 200 μl in a 96 well plate. Primary T-cells were washed in PBS and subsequently incubated for 15 min with myc antibody on ice. Following a PBS wash, cells were incubated for 15 min with fluorophore-conjugated antibodies against CD4 and CD8 along with Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated secondary antibody targeting the myc antibody. Stained cells were subsequently subjected to phosphorylation analysis. For phosphorylation analysis using flow cytometry, cells were centrifuged (300g, for 5 min), 100 μl of medium was discarded, and the remaining 100 μl of the stimulated cell suspension were mixed with 100 μl of 4% paraformaldehyde and incubated at 37 °C for 10 min. Cells were then centrifuged (300g, 4 °C for 5 min). The resulting cell pellets were resuspended in ice-cold 90% methanol and incubated at −20 °C for 10 min. Subsequently, cells were washed twice with ice-cold BSA-EDTA buffer (1% BSA, 2 mM EDTA in PBS). Cells were then incubated overnight with fluorophore-coupled primary antibodies against STAT1 and STAT3 (1:100 dilution) or phospho-STAT1 (Y701) and phospho-STAT3 (Y705) (1:200 dilution) 2% BSA and 0.5 mM EDTA in PBS. Prior to analysis, cells were washed three times in 1% BSA-EDTA buffer. STAT3 and STAT1 activation was calculated by taking the ratio of the mean fluorescence intensity of total STAT1 or STAT3 to phosphorylated STAT1 (pSTAT1) or phosphorylated STAT3 (pSTAT3), respectively, for each sample; these values were normalized to those obtained with HIL6. Flow cytometry analysis was performed using FACS Canto II (BD Biosciences). Data were analyzed using FlowJo software (version 10.6.1, BD Biosciences).

AnnexinV/7-aminoactinomycin D stainingBa/F3-gp130 cell lines were washed three times with PBS. Subsequently, 1.25 × 105 cells were used per well and incubated with the indicated cytokines for 24 h. For the ethanol condition, cells were only incubated with HIL-6 (10 ng/ml). Ethanol treatment replaced the last washing step before the measurement. Cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and if indicated with 70% ethanol. Cells were resuspended in 300 μl Annexin V binding buffer (BD Bioscience) with 0.5 μl Annexin V-PE (ImmunoTools) and incubated for 15 min in the dark at RT. One microliter of 7-aminoactinomycin D (R&D Systems) was added before analysis was carried out by flow cytometry recording 20,000 events.

AnnexinV/7-aminoactinomycin D staining

Ba/F3-gp130 cell lines were washed three times with PBS. Subsequently, 1.25 × 105 cells were used per well and incubated with the indicated cytokines for 24 h. For the ethanol condition, cells were only incubated with HIL-6 (10 ng/ml). Ethanol treatment replaced the last washing step before the measurement. Cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and if indicated with 70% ethanol. Cells were resuspended in 300 μl Annexin V binding buffer (BD Bioscience) with 0.5 μl Annexin V-PE (ImmunoTools) and incubated for 15 min in the dark at RT. One microliter of 7-aminoactinomycin D (R&D Systems) was added before analysis was carried out by flow cytometry recording 20,000 events.

Fluorimetric caspase 3/7 assayBa/F3-gp130 cells were washed three times with PBS. Subsequently, 1.25 × 105 cells were incubated with the indicated cytokines for 6 h in a 96-well plate in a volume of 100 μl. Subsequently, induction of apoptosis was determined using Amplite Fluorimetric Caspase 3/7 Assay kit (AAT Bioquest, Inc) according to manufacturer’s recommendations. In brief, 100 μl of the caspase-3/7 working solution was added to the cells and incubated for 2 h at RT. After centrifugation at 450g for 1 min, the fluorescence (excitation 350 nm, emission 450 nm) using an Infinite M200 PRO plate reader (Tecan) was determined.

Fluorimetric caspase 3/7 assay

Ba/F3-gp130 cells were washed three times with PBS. Subsequently, 1.25 × 105 cells were incubated with the indicated cytokines for 6 h in a 96-well plate in a volume of 100 μl. Subsequently, induction of apoptosis was determined using Amplite Fluorimetric Caspase 3/7 Assay kit (AAT Bioquest, Inc) according to manufacturer’s recommendations. In brief, 100 μl of the caspase-3/7 working solution was added to the cells and incubated for 2 h at RT. After centrifugation at 450g for 1 min, the fluorescence (excitation 350 nm, emission 450 nm) using an Infinite M200 PRO plate reader (Tecan) was determined.

Statistical analysesFor proliferation assays, a representative experiment of n ≥ three assays with comparable results is displayed. EC50 values were determined using a nonlinear regression analysis with variable slope calculation in GraphPad Prism 8.0 (version 8.0.2 for Windows, GraphPad Software, www.graphpad.com) from three individual experiments. The data are presented as means ± SD. For multiple comparisons, two-way ANOVA including Bonferroni as statistical hypothesis test was used (GraphPad Prism 8.0.2, GraphPad Software Inc.). Statistical significance was set at the level of p < 0.05 (∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗∗p < 0.001).

Statistical analyses

For proliferation assays, a representative experiment of n ≥ three assays with comparable results is displayed. EC50 values were determined using a nonlinear regression analysis with variable slope calculation in GraphPad Prism 8.0 (version 8.0.2 for Windows, GraphPad Software, www.graphpad.com) from three individual experiments. The data are presented as means ± SD. For multiple comparisons, two-way ANOVA including Bonferroni as statistical hypothesis test was used (GraphPad Prism 8.0.2, GraphPad Software Inc.). Statistical significance was set at the level of p < 0.05 (∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗∗p < 0.001).

Data availabilityAll materials will be provided upon request.

Data availability

All materials will be provided upon request.

Supporting informationThis article contains supporting information.

Supporting information

This article contains supporting information.

Conflict of interestThe authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.

Conflict of interest

The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.
