---
pmid: '25014274'
title: Identification of a phospholipase B encoded by the LPL1 gene in Saccharomyces
  cerevisiae.
authors:
- Selvaraju K
- Rajakumar S
- Nachiappan V
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2014.06.013
---

# Identification of a phospholipase B encoded by the LPL1 gene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Selvaraju K, Rajakumar S, Nachiappan V
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbalip.2014.06.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbalip.2014.06.013)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Oct;1842(10):1383-92. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbalip.2014.06.013. Epub 2014 Jul 8.

Identification of a phospholipase B encoded by the LPL1 gene in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae.

Selvaraju K(1), Rajakumar S(1), Nachiappan V(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Bharathidasan 
University, Tiruchirappalli, 620024, Tamilnadu, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Bharathidasan 
University, Tiruchirappalli, 620024, Tamilnadu, India. Electronic address: 
vasanthibch@gmail.com.

Phospholipids also play a major role in maintaining the lipid droplet (LD) 
morphology. In our current study, deletion of LPL1 resulted in altered 
morphology of LDs and was confirmed by microscopic analysis. LPL1/YOR059c 
contains lipase specific motif GXSXG and acetate labeling in the LPL1 
overexpressed strains depicted a decrease in glycerophospholipids and an 
increase in free fatty acids. The purified Lpl1p showed phospholipase activity 
with broader substrate specificity, acting on all glycerophospholipids primarily 
at sn-2 position and later at sn-1 position. Localization studies precisely 
revealed that Lpl1 is exclusively localized in the LD at the stationary phase. 
Site directed mutagenesis experiments clearly demonstrated that the lipase motif 
is vital for the phospholipase activity. In summary, our results demonstrate 
that yeast Lpl1 exerts phospholipase activity, plays a vital role in LD 
morphology, and its absence results in altered LD size. Based on the 
localization and enzyme activity we renamed YOR059c as LPL1 (LD phospholipase 
1).

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2014.06.013
PMID: 25014274
