---
pmid: '11045615'
title: High resolution refinement of beta-galactosidase in a new crystal form reveals
  multiple metal-binding sites and provides a structural basis for alpha-complementation.
authors:
- Juers DH
- Jacobson RH
- Wigley D
- Zhang XJ
- Huber RE
- Tronrud DE
- Matthews BW
journal: Protein Sci
year: '2000'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC2144713
doi: 10.1110/ps.9.9.1685
---

# High resolution refinement of beta-galactosidase in a new crystal form reveals multiple metal-binding sites and provides a structural basis for alpha-complementation.
**Authors:** Juers DH, Jacobson RH, Wigley D, Zhang XJ, Huber RE, Tronrud DE, Matthews BW
**Journal:** Protein Sci (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1110/ps.9.9.1685](https://doi.org/10.1110/ps.9.9.1685)
**PMC:** [PMC2144713](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2144713/)

## Abstract

1. Protein Sci. 2000 Sep;9(9):1685-99. doi: 10.1110/ps.9.9.1685.

High resolution refinement of beta-galactosidase in a new crystal form reveals 
multiple metal-binding sites and provides a structural basis for 
alpha-complementation.

Juers DH(1), Jacobson RH, Wigley D, Zhang XJ, Huber RE, Tronrud DE, Matthews BW.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, and Department of Physics, University of 
Oregon, Eugene 97403-1229, USA.

The unrefined fold of Escherichia coli beta-galactosidase based on a monoclinic 
crystal form with four independent tetramers has been reported previously. Here, 
we describe a new, orthorhombic form with one tetramer per asymmetric unit that 
has permitted refinement of the structure at 1.7 A resolution. This 
high-resolution analysis has confirmed the original description of the structure 
and revealed new details. An essential magnesium ion, identified at the active 
site in the monoclinic crystals, is also seen in the orthorhombic form. 
Additional putative magnesium binding sites are also seen. Sodium ions are also 
known to affect catalysis, and five putative binding sites have been identified, 
one close to the active site. In a crevice on the protein surface, five linked 
five-membered solvent rings form a partial clathrate-like structure. Some other 
unusual aspects of the structure include seven apparent cis-peptide bonds, four 
of which are proline, and several internal salt-bridge networks. Deep 
solvent-filled channels and tunnels extend across the surface of the molecule 
and pass through the center of the tetramer. Because of these departures from a 
compact globular shape, the molecule is not well characterized by prior 
empirical relationships between the mass and surface area of proteins. The 50 or 
so residues at the amino terminus have a largely extended conformation and 
mostly lie across the surface of the protein. At the same time, however, segment 
13-21 contributes to a subunit interface, and residues 29-33 pass through a 
"tunnel" formed by a domain interface. Taken together, the overall arrangement 
provides a structural basis for the phenomenon of alpha-complementation.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.9.9.1685
PMCID: PMC2144713
PMID: 11045615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The unrefined fold of Escherichia coli beta-galactosidase based on a monoclinic crystal form with four independent tetramers has been reported previously. Here, we describe a new, orthorhombic form with one tetramer per asymmetric unit that has permitted refinement of the structure at 1.7 A resolution. This high-resolution analysis has confirmed the original description of the structure and revealed new details. An essential magnesium ion, identified at the active site in the monoclinic crystals, is also seen in the orthorhombic form. Additional putative magnesium binding sites are also seen. Sodium ions are also known to affect catalysis, and five putative binding sites have been identified, one close to the active site. In a crevice on the protein surface, five linked five-membered solvent rings form a partial clathrate-like structure. Some other unusual aspects of the structure include seven apparent cis-peptide bonds, four of which are proline, and several internal salt-bridge networks. Deep solvent-filled channels and tunnels extend across the surface of the molecule and pass through the center of the tetramer. Because of these departures from a compact globular shape, the molecule is not well characterized by prior empirical relationships between the mass and surface area of proteins. The 50 or so residues at the amino terminus have a largely extended conformation and mostly lie across the surface of the protein. At the same time, however, segment 13-21 contributes to a subunit interface, and residues 29-33 pass through a "tunnel" formed by a domain interface. Taken together, the overall arrangement provides a structural basis for the phenomenon of alpha-complementation.
