---
pmid: '1368505'
title: Cloning and heterologous expression of the penicillin biosynthetic gene cluster
  from penicillum chrysogenum.
authors:
- Smith DJ
- Burnham MK
- Edwards J
- Earl AJ
- Turner G
journal: Biotechnology (N Y)
year: '1990'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nbt0190-39
---

# Cloning and heterologous expression of the penicillin biosynthetic gene cluster from penicillum chrysogenum.
**Authors:** Smith DJ, Burnham MK, Edwards J, Earl AJ, Turner G
**Journal:** Biotechnology (N Y) (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nbt0190-39](https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt0190-39)

## Abstract

1. Biotechnology (N Y). 1990 Jan;8(1):39-41. doi: 10.1038/nbt0190-39.

Cloning and heterologous expression of the penicillin biosynthetic gene cluster 
from penicillum chrysogenum.

Smith DJ(1), Burnham MK, Edwards J, Earl AJ, Turner G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Bristol, U.K.

A cosmid clone containing the putative penicillin biosynthetic gene cluster from 
Penicillium chrysogenum was used to transform the related filamentous fungi 
Neurospora crassa and Aspergillus niger, which do not produce beta-lactam 
antibiotics. Both of the transformed hosts contained intact P. chrysogenum DNA 
derived from the cosmid clone and produced authentic penicillin V. Assays of 
penicillin biosynthetic enzyme activity additionally demonstrated that they 
possessed delta-(L-alpha-amino-adipyl)-L-cysteinyl-D-valine synthetase (ACVS), 
isopenicillin N synthetase (IPNS) and acyl coenzyme A:6-aminopenicillanic acid 
acyltransferase (ACT) activity. The data suggests that genes encoding all the 
enzymes necessary for the biosynthesis of penicillin from amino acid precursors 
are closely linked in P. chrysogenum and constitute a gene cluster.

DOI: 10.1038/nbt0190-39
PMID: 1368505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
