---
pmid: '18264088'
title: Resistance to therapy caused by intragenic deletion in BRCA2.
authors:
- Edwards SL
- Brough R
- Lord CJ
- Natrajan R
- Vatcheva R
- Levine DA
- Boyd J
- Reis-Filho JS
- Ashworth A
journal: Nature
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature06548
---

# Resistance to therapy caused by intragenic deletion in BRCA2.
**Authors:** Edwards SL, Brough R, Lord CJ, Natrajan R, Vatcheva R, Levine DA, Boyd J, Reis-Filho JS, Ashworth A
**Journal:** Nature (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature06548](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06548)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2008 Feb 28;451(7182):1111-5. doi: 10.1038/nature06548. Epub 2008 Feb 
10.

Resistance to therapy caused by intragenic deletion in BRCA2.

Edwards SL(1), Brough R, Lord CJ, Natrajan R, Vatcheva R, Levine DA, Boyd J, 
Reis-Filho JS, Ashworth A.

Author information:
(1)The Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, The Institute of Cancer 
Research, Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, UK.

Comment in
    Nature. 2008 Feb 28;451(7182):1066-7. doi: 10.1038/4511066a.

Cells with loss of BRCA2 function are defective in homologous recombination (HR) 
and are highly sensitive to inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), 
which provides the basis for a new therapeutic approach. Here we show that 
resistance to PARP inhibition can be acquired by deletion of a mutation in 
BRCA2. We derived PARP-inhibitor-resistant (PIR) clones from the human CAPAN1 
pancreatic cancer cell line, which carries the protein-truncating c.6174delT 
frameshift mutation. PIR clones could form DNA-damage-induced RAD51 nuclear foci 
and were able to limit genotoxin-induced genomic instability, both hallmarks of 
a competent HR pathway. New BRCA2 isoforms were expressed in the resistant lines 
as a result of intragenic deletion of the c.6174delT mutation and restoration of 
the open reading frame (ORF). Reconstitution of BRCA2-deficient cells with these 
revertant BRCA2 alleles rescued PARP inhibitor sensitivity and HR deficiency. 
Most of the deletions in BRCA2 were associated with small tracts of homology, 
and possibly arose from error-prone repair caused by BRCA2 deficiency. Similar 
ORF-restoring mutations were present in carboplatin-resistant ovarian tumours 
from c.6174delT mutation carriers. These observations have implications for 
understanding drug resistance in BRCA mutation carriers as well as in defining 
functionally important domains within BRCA2.

DOI: 10.1038/nature06548
PMID: 18264088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
