---
pmid: '17275127'
title: HCV NS5A inhibits interferon-alpha signaling through suppression of STAT1 phosphorylation
  in hepatocyte-derived cell lines.
authors:
- Lan KH
- Lan KL
- Lee WP
- Sheu ML
- Chen MY
- Lee YL
- Yen SH
- Chang FY
- Lee SD
journal: J Hepatol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2006.11.013
---

# HCV NS5A inhibits interferon-alpha signaling through suppression of STAT1 phosphorylation in hepatocyte-derived cell lines.
**Authors:** Lan KH, Lan KL, Lee WP, Sheu ML, Chen MY, Lee YL, Yen SH, Chang FY, Lee SD
**Journal:** J Hepatol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhep.2006.11.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2006.11.013)

## Abstract

1. J Hepatol. 2007 May;46(5):759-67. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2006.11.013. Epub 2006
Dec  14.

HCV NS5A inhibits interferon-alpha signaling through suppression of STAT1 
phosphorylation in hepatocyte-derived cell lines.

Lan KH(1), Lan KL, Lee WP, Sheu ML, Chen MY, Lee YL, Yen SH, Chang FY, Lee SD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, National Yang-Ming 
University, Taipei, Taiwan. khlan@vghtpe.gov.tw

BACKGROUND/AIMS: HCV NS5A appears to play an important role in HCV resistance to 
IFN-alpha but the molecular mechanism is not fully elucidated. Most studies 
regarding the involvement of signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 
(STAT1) in inhibition of IFN-alpha signaling by NS5A were performed in 
non-hepatic cell lines and their relevance may be debatable.
METHODS: We analyzed the effects of NS5A on IFN-alpha signaling through STAT1 
phosphorylation in three hepatocyte-derived cell lines, Hep3B, J5 and Huh7. 
Interaction of NS5A and STAT1 was also investigated with co-immunoprecipitation 
and confocal microscopy.
RESULTS: IFN-alpha induces STAT1 activation in Hep3B cells in a dose- and 
time-dependent manner. Transient or stable NS5A expression inhibits STAT1 
phosphorylation in a dose-dependent manner in hepatocyte-derived cell lines, 
whereas the levels of STAT1 phosphorylation remain unchanged in non-hepatocyte 
HeLa and COS7 cells despite increasing amounts of NS5A. The NS5A may interact 
with STAT1, specifically, the N-terminal 488 amino acids of STAT1. Furthermore, 
NS5A inhibits activation of interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) and 
interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE)-driven gene expression, as 
demonstrated by electrophoretic mobility shift assay and luciferase assay, 
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: NS5A may interact with STAT1 and inhibit IFN-alpha signaling 
through suppression of STAT1 phosphorylation specifically in hepatocyte-derived 
cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2006.11.013
PMID: 17275127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
