---
pmid: '12607005'
title: MDC1 is a mediator of the mammalian DNA damage checkpoint.
authors:
- Stewart GS
- Wang B
- Bignell CR
- Taylor AM
- Elledge SJ
journal: Nature
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature01446
---

# MDC1 is a mediator of the mammalian DNA damage checkpoint.
**Authors:** Stewart GS, Wang B, Bignell CR, Taylor AM, Elledge SJ
**Journal:** Nature (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature01446](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature01446)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2003 Feb 27;421(6926):961-6. doi: 10.1038/nature01446.

MDC1 is a mediator of the mammalian DNA damage checkpoint.

Stewart GS(1), Wang B, Bignell CR, Taylor AM, Elledge SJ.

Author information:
(1)Verna & Mars McLean Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

To counteract the continuous exposure of cells to agents that damage DNA, cells 
have evolved complex regulatory networks called checkpoints to sense DNA damage 
and coordinate DNA replication, cell-cycle arrest and DNA repair. It has 
recently been shown that the histone H2A variant H2AX specifically controls the 
recruitment of DNA repair proteins to the sites of DNA damage. Here we identify 
a novel BRCA1 carboxy-terminal (BRCT) and forkhead-associated (FHA) 
domain-containing protein, MDC1 (mediator of DNA damage checkpoint protein 1), 
which works with H2AX to promote recruitment of repair proteins to the sites of 
DNA breaks and which, in addition, controls damage-induced cell-cycle arrest 
checkpoints. MDC1 forms foci that co-localize extensively with gamma-H2AX foci 
within minutes after exposure to ionizing radiation. H2AX is required for MDC1 
foci formation, and MDC1 forms complexes with phosphorylated H2AX. Furthermore, 
this interaction is phosphorylation dependent as peptides containing the 
phosphorylated site on H2AX bind MDC1 in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. We 
have shown by using small interfering RNA (siRNA) that cells lacking MDC1 are 
sensitive to ionizing radiation, and that MDC1 controls the formation of 
damage-induced 53BP1, BRCA1 and MRN foci, in part by promoting efficient H2AX 
phosphorylation. In addition, cells lacking MDC1 also fail to activate the 
intra-S phase and G2/M phase cell-cycle checkpoints properly after exposure to 
ionizing radiation, which was associated with an inability to regulate Chk1 
properly. These results highlight a crucial role for MDC1 in mediating 
transduction of the DNA damage signal.

DOI: 10.1038/nature01446
PMID: 12607005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
