---
pmid: '21215368'
title: The Cul4-Ddb1(Cdt)² ubiquitin ligase inhibits invasion of a boundary-associated
  antisilencing factor into heterochromatin.
authors:
- Braun S
- Garcia JF
- Rowley M
- Rougemaille M
- Shankar S
- Madhani HD
journal: Cell
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3645473
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.11.051
---

# The Cul4-Ddb1(Cdt)² ubiquitin ligase inhibits invasion of a boundary-associated antisilencing factor into heterochromatin.
**Authors:** Braun S, Garcia JF, Rowley M, Rougemaille M, Shankar S, Madhani HD
**Journal:** Cell (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2010.11.051](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2010.11.051)
**PMC:** [PMC3645473](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3645473/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2011 Jan 7;144(1):41-54. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.11.051.

The Cul4-Ddb1(Cdt)² ubiquitin ligase inhibits invasion of a boundary-associated 
antisilencing factor into heterochromatin.

Braun S(1), Garcia JF, Rowley M, Rougemaille M, Shankar S, Madhani HD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San 
Francisco, 94158, USA.

Partitioning of chromosomes into euchromatic and heterochromatic domains 
requires mechanisms that specify boundaries. The S. pombe JmjC family protein 
Epe1 prevents the ectopic spread of heterochromatin and is itself concentrated 
at boundaries. Paradoxically, Epe1 is recruited to heterochromatin by HP1 
silencing factors that are distributed throughout heterochromatin. We 
demonstrate here that the selective enrichment of Epe1 at boundaries requires 
its regulation by the conserved Cul4-Ddb1(Cdt)² ubiquitin ligase, which directly 
recognizes Epe1 and promotes its polyubiquitylation and degradation. Strikingly, 
in cells lacking the ligase, Epe1 persists in the body of heterochromatin 
thereby inducing a defect in gene silencing. Epe1 is the sole target of the 
Cul4-Ddb1(Cdt)² complex whose destruction is necessary for the preservation of 
heterochromatin. This mechanism acts parallel with phosphorylation of HP1/Swi6 
by CK2 to restrict Epe1. We conclude that the ubiquitin-dependent sculpting of 
the chromosomal distribution of an antisilencing factor is critical for 
heterochromatin boundaries to form correctly.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.11.051
PMCID: PMC3645473
PMID: 21215368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Eukaryotic genomes are organized into active and inactive domains referred to as euchromatin and heterochromatin. This functional organization plays an important role in chromosome segregation, telomere maintenance, and genome stability. Given the repressive nature of heterochromatin, the regulation of its assembly is critical for genome homeostasis. The fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe has become a powerful model system for dissecting mechanisms of eukaryotic heterochromatin control (for an extensive review, see Grewal, 2010 ). Its genome contains three distinct major heterochromatic domains: pericentromeric otr repeats, subtelomeric regions, and the silent mating type locus mat2/mat3 . As in metazoans and plants, a key step in heterochromatin assembly is the recruitment of a histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) methyltransferase (Clr4 in S. pombe ) to chromatin. The methylation of H3K9 by Clr4 is required for the recruitment of the HP1 family proteins Swi6 and Chp2, which then appear to spread along the DNA fiber. It is thought that nucleation of heterochromatin is guided by RNA interference (RNAi)-dependent and -independent mechanisms. In the RNAi-dependent pathway, heterochromatic sequences are transcribed by RNA polymerase II (Pol II) during S phase, and siRNAs are subsequently generated by the RNAi machinery. Whereas pericentromeric heterochromatin requires the RNAi-dependent pathway for its establishment, both pathways act redundantly at the telomeres and the silent mating type locus.

Initial H3K9 methylation and subsequent binding of HP1 proteins lead to the spreading of this repressive modification, but the phenomenon of heterochromatin spread is still poorly understood (reviewed in Talbert and Henikoff, 2006 ). HP1 proteins, whose chromatin association depends on H3K9 methylation, seem to be involved in recruiting the upstream H3K9 methyltransferase. This has been suggested to result in methylation of neighboring nucleosomes, thereby creating a positive feedback loop in assembly and spreading of heterochromatin over large distances in cis. Spreading is a stochastic process that can result in metastable but heritable silencing of neighboring euchromatic genes, a phenomenon known as position effect variegation (PEV) ( Gaszner and Felsenfeld, 2006 ). The invasion of heterochromatin into adjacent euchromatic regions is prevented by boundary elements, which terminate the chain of events involved in spreading. The mechanisms by which boundaries are formed are complex, and a number of models have been proposed that include tethering of boundary elements to subnuclear regions and recruiting silencing-opposing activities ( Gaszner and Felsenfeld, 2006 ). In S. pombe , the euchromatin-heterochromatin borders are characterized by sharp transitions of euchromatic and heterochromatic histone modifications ( Cam et al., 2005 ). Specific boundary elements composed of inverted repeat ( IR ) sequences are found at the boundaries flanking the silent mating type locus and the pericentromeric regions of chromosomes 1 and 3 ( Cam et al., 2005 ; Noma et al., 2006 ). The left and right boundary elements at the silent mating type locus ( IR-R/L ) contain recruitment sites for transcription factor TFIIIC, which has been suggested to delineate heterochromatic domains by sequestering the boundary elements to the nuclear periphery ( Noma et al., 2006 ). Conversely, the pericentromeric inverted repeat ( IRC ) elements are associated with Pol II-dependent transcription and show an enrichment of euchromatic marks ( Cam et al., 2005 ; Noma et al., 2006 ). Other boundaries at pericentromeric regions are characterized by tRNA gene clusters, which seem to be critical for barrier function ( Scott et al., 2006 ).

Epe1 ( e nhancer of p osition e ffect) was previously identified in a screen for mutants in S. pombe that display propagation of heterochromatin beyond its natural borders. Mutants of epe1 + show enhanced PEV at the silent mating type locus and pericentromeric regions ( Ayoub et al., 2003 ). Epe1 is critical for the boundary function of the pericentromeric IRC elements and mediates their Pol II-dependent transcription ( Zofall and Grewal, 2006 ). The mechanism by which Epe1 antagonizes heterochromatin spread is unknown. Epe1 contains a JmjC domain that is present in many histone demethylases but lacks a conserved residue predicted to be involved in binding of a catalytic iron atom. Furthermore, no histone demethylase activity has been detected for Epe1 in vitro ( Tsukada et al., 2006 ). Despite being an antisilencing factor, Epe1 interacts with the HP1 proteins Swi6 and Chp2 in vivo and in vitro and is itself recruited to heterochromatin in an HP1-dependent manner ( Sadaie et al., 2008 ; Zofall and Grewal, 2006 ). In particular, Epe1 facilitates the recruitment of Pol II to heterochromatic regions ( Zofall and Grewal, 2006 ). Perhaps due to this role in Pol II-dependent transcription, mutants of epe1 + have perturbed levels of heterochromatic siRNAs and are affected in the stability of heterochromatic domains ( Trewick et al., 2007 ). In addition, Epe1 appears to compete for binding to heterochromatin with the HDAC effector complex SHREC ( Shimada et al., 2009 ). These findings raised the important question of how heterochromatin is protected from the silencing-antagonizing activity of Epe1 that it recruits.

Histones have long been known to be substrates for the ubiquitin system. Conjugation involves the transfer of ubiquitin to a lysine residue within the substrate by an enzymatic cascade comprising an activating enzyme (E1), a conjugating enzyme (E2), and an ubiquitin ligase (E3), the latter determining substrate specificity of ubiquitylation. Ubiquitylation plays a crucial role in the regulation of chromatin. For instance, monoubiquitylation of histone H2A is associated with silencing of the mammalian Hox gene cluster ( Wang et al., 2004 ), whereas ubiquitylation of histone H2B is a prerequisite for methylation of H3K4 and H3K79 ( Nakanishi et al., 2009 ; Sun and Allis, 2002 ).

Methylation of H3K9 in S. pombe requires a multisubunit E3 that associates with the H3K9 methyltransferase Clr4 in the CLRC complex and is necessary for chromatin recruitment of Clr4 ( Hong et al., 2005 ). This E3 enzyme, Cul4-Rik1 Dos1/Dos2 , is related to the cullin-RING finger family of ubiquitin ligases (CRLs), in particular the conserved Cul4-Ddb1 DCAF complexes. Common to this family is a modular architecture that employs a cullin family scaffold, a RING finger protein that recruits the ubiquitin-conjugating E2 enzyme, and a substrate recognition factor ( Jackson and Xiong, 2009 ). Ddb1 is a specific adaptor protein of Cul4 RING finger ligases (Cul4-Ddb1) and recruits the substrate recognition factor that confers specificity to the ubiquitylation reaction. Most of the identified substrate recognition factors (DCAFs, D db1/ C ul4 a ssociated f actors) contain WD40 repeats ( Lee and Zhou, 2007 ). However, in the Cul4-Rik1 Dos1/Dos2 complex, the conserved Ddb1 adaptor is replaced by Rik1 and the substrate recognition DCAF subunit is replaced by Dos1/Dos2. As the Cul4-Rik1 Dos1/Dos2 E3 seems to function particularly in silencing, it appears to be a specialized paralog of the conserved Cul4 CRLs. Despite its requirement for heterochromatin formation, the corresponding substrate has not been identified.

Here, we report the identification of a regulatory mechanism essential for proper boundary formation and heterochromatic silencing in S. pombe , which unexpectedly requires the action of the canonical CRL Cul4-Ddb1 Cdt2 . We demonstrate that the Cul4-Ddb1 Cdt2 complex directly recognizes and promotes ubiquitylation and degradation of the boundary factor Epe1. Strikingly, this pathway controls the distribution of this antisilencing factor within heterochromatic domains and restricts Epe1 to the heterochromatic boundaries. We show that this heterochromatin-sculpting function of Cul4-Ddb1 Cdt2 is sufficient to explain its requirement for silencing. Our studies define a ubiquitin-dependent degradation event necessary for heterochromatin formation and demonstrate that it functions to shape heterochromatin.

DISCUSSION

Our study identified a regulatory mechanism required for proper boundary architecture and heterochromatic silencing in S. pombe . This mechanism involves the conserved ubiquitin ligase Cul4-Ddb1 Cdt2 , which targets the JmjC protein Epe1 for ubiquitin-dependent degradation. Epe1 antagonizes the spread of heterochromatin and has a potential role in boundary formation ( Ayoub et al., 2003 ), yet it is found within heterochromatic domains and associates directly with the H3K9me-binding protein Swi6 ( Zofall and Grewal, 2006 ). This paradoxical finding raises the fundamental question of how Epe1 is precluded from interfering with heterochromatin formation. Our findings demonstrate that Cul4-Ddb1 Cdt2 controls the chromosomal landscape of Epe1 in a manner that substantially restricts its accumulation to heterochromatic boundaries by limiting its spreading into the bodies of heterochromatic domains. This heterochromatin-shaping function of Cul4-Ddb1 Cdt2 is required for silencing.
