---
pmid: '1898066'
title: Purification and characterization of a fibrinolytic enzyme from venom of the
  southern copperhead snake (Agkistrodon contortrix contortrix).
authors:
- Guan AL
- Retzios AD
- Henderson GN
- Markland FS Jr
journal: Arch Biochem Biophys
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0003-9861(91)90462-r
---

# Purification and characterization of a fibrinolytic enzyme from venom of the southern copperhead snake (Agkistrodon contortrix contortrix).
**Authors:** Guan AL, Retzios AD, Henderson GN, Markland FS Jr
**Journal:** Arch Biochem Biophys (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0003-9861(91)90462-r](https://doi.org/10.1016/0003-9861(91)90462-r)

## Abstract

1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1991 Sep;289(2):197-207. doi: 
10.1016/0003-9861(91)90462-r.

Purification and characterization of a fibrinolytic enzyme from venom of the 
southern copperhead snake (Agkistrodon contortrix contortrix).

Guan AL(1), Retzios AD, Henderson GN, Markland FS Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Southern California School of 
Medicine, Los Angeles 90033.

A fibrinolytic enzyme present in Agkistrodon contortrix contortrix (southern 
copperhead) venom has been purified by combination of CM-cellulose 
chromatography, molecular sieve chromatography on Sephadex G-100, 
p-aminobenzamidine-agarose affinity chromatography, and DEAE-cellulose 
chromatography. The enzyme, fibrolase, has a molecular weight of 23,000-24,000 
and an isoelectric point of pH 6.8. It is composed of approximately 200 amino 
acids, possesses a blocked NH2-terminus and contains little or no carbohydrate. 
The enzyme shows no activity against a series of chromogenic p-nitroanilide 
substrates and is not inhibited by diisopropylfluorophosphate, soybean trypsin 
inhibitor, Trasylol, or p-chloromercuribenzoate. However, the enzyme is a 
metalloproteinase since it is inhibited by EDTA, o-phenanthroline and 
tetraethylenepentamine (a specific zinc chelator). Metal analysis revealed 1 mol 
of zinc/mol of protein. Study of cleavage site preference of the fibrinolytic 
enzyme using the oxidized B chain of insulin revealed that specificity is 
similar to other snake venom metalloproteinases with cleavage primarily directed 
to an X-Leu bond. Interestingly, unlike some other venom fibrinolytic 
metalloproteinases, fibrolase exhibits little if any hemorrhagic activity. The 
enzyme exhibits direct fibrinolytic activity and does not activate plasminogen. 
In vitro studies revealed that fibrolase dissolves clots made either from 
purified fibrinogen or from whole blood.

DOI: 10.1016/0003-9861(91)90462-r
PMID: 1898066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
