---
pmid: '19154719'
title: Nrarp coordinates endothelial Notch and Wnt signaling to control vessel density
  in angiogenesis.
authors:
- Phng LK
- Potente M
- Leslie JD
- Babbage J
- Nyqvist D
- Lobov I
- Ondr JK
- Rao S
- Lang RA
- Thurston G
- Gerhardt H
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC8114544
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.12.009
---

# Nrarp coordinates endothelial Notch and Wnt signaling to control vessel density in angiogenesis.
**Authors:** Phng LK, Potente M, Leslie JD, Babbage J, Nyqvist D, Lobov I, Ondr JK, Rao S, Lang RA, Thurston G, Gerhardt H
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2008.12.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2008.12.009)
**PMC:** [PMC8114544](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8114544/)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2009 Jan;16(1):70-82. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.12.009.

Nrarp coordinates endothelial Notch and Wnt signaling to control vessel density 
in angiogenesis.

Phng LK(1), Potente M, Leslie JD, Babbage J, Nyqvist D, Lobov I, Ondr JK, Rao S, 
Lang RA, Thurston G, Gerhardt H.

Author information:
(1)Vascular Biology Laboratory, London Research Institute - Cancer Research UK, 
London, UK.

When and where to make or break new blood vessel connections is the key to 
understanding guided vascular patterning. VEGF-A stimulation and Dll4/Notch 
signaling cooperatively control the number of new connections by regulating 
endothelial tip cell formation. Here, we show that the Notch-regulated ankyrin 
repeat protein (Nrarp) acts as a molecular link between Notch- and 
Lef1-dependent Wnt signaling in endothelial cells to control stability of new 
vessel connections in mouse and zebrafish. Dll4/Notch-induced expression of 
Nrarp limits Notch signaling and promotes Wnt/Ctnnb1 signaling in endothelial 
stalk cells through interactions with Lef1. BATgal-reporter expression confirms 
Wnt signaling activity in endothelial stalk cells. Ex vivo, combined Wnt3a and 
Dll4 stimulation of endothelial cells enhances Wnt-reporter activity, which is 
abrogated by loss of Nrarp. In vivo, loss of Nrarp, Lef1, or endothelial Ctnnb1 
causes vessel regression. We suggest that the balance between Notch and Wnt 
signaling determines whether to make or break new vessel connections.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.12.009
PMCID: PMC8114544
PMID: 19154719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Formation of a vascular network during sprouting angiogenesis is controlled by coordinated endothelial cell (EC) migration, proliferation, and differentiation. Tubular sprouting from epithelial/endothelial structures or cell clusters in Drosophila and vertebrates relies on a set of conserved basic principles including (1) induction and selection of a leading tip cell, (2) sprout elongation and stalk formation through intercalation and/or proliferation, (3) branching, (4) anastomosis and, finally, (5) stabilization of the connected network ( Lubarsky and Krasnow, 2003 ). In the vertebrate vasculature, sprouting is induced by local production of proangiogenic factors, including vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A). Endothelial VEGF receptor 2 (VEGFR2) stimulation and signaling is required for filopodia formation and tip cell induction and is also involved in stalk cell proliferation ( Gerhardt et al., 2003 ). Recent work in mouse and zebrafish illustrates that VEGF-A/VEGFR2-dependent signaling also induces expression of the Notch receptor ligand Delta-like 4 (Dll4) in endothelial tip cells ( Leslie et al., 2007 ; Liu et al., 2003 ; Lobov et al., 2007 ). Dll4 signals in a contact-dependent manner to neighboring endothelial cells through Notch1 to limit their tip cell behavior ( Hellstrom et al., 2007b ; Leslie et al., 2007 ; Lobov et al., 2007 ; Siekmann and Lawson, 2007 ; Suchting et al., 2007 ). This mechanism regulates and balances the number of tip cells required for effective sprouting and network formation.

Subsequent to sprouting angiogenesis, the mature hierarchical tubular network is a result of extensive pruning of the initial primitive plexus through selective branch regression. With the exception of hyaloid vessel regression ( Lobov et al., 2005 ; Rao et al., 2007 ), the detailed mechanism of vascular pruning is poorly understood. Inhibition of VEGF-A signaling in adult mice leads to vessel regression associated with lumenal fibrin clot formation, EC apoptosis, formation of empty basement membrane sleeves, and pericyte migration to remaining patent vessels ( Baffert et al., 2006 ). Loss or ectopic activation of endothelial Notch signaling increases or reduces vascular density, respectively, indicating that endothelial Notch signaling is a key regulator of vascular density ( Gridley, 2007 ). The downstream targets of endothelial Notch signaling in this process remain unknown.

The Notch-regulated ankyrin repeat protein ( Nrarp ) is induced by Notch signaling through the CSL-dependent pathway ( Krebs et al., 2001 ; Lamar et al., 2001 ; Pirot et al., 2004 ). In the mouse, the Nrarp gene encodes a small protein of 114 amino acids with two ankyrin repeat domains. In the zebrafish, two nrarp paralogs, nrarp-a and nrarp-b , encode proteins of 112 and 111 amino acids, respectively ( Topczewska et al., 2003 ), which share 80% amino acid sequence homology with mouse Nrarp ( Topczewska et al., 2003 ). By investigating the expression and function of murine Nrarp and zebrafish nrarp-a and nrarp-b in angiogenesis, we find that Nrarp acts downstream of Notch at newly formed branch points to regulate vascular density. Nrarp performs this function by integrating endothelial Notch and Wnt signaling to control stalk cell proliferation and to stabilize new endothelial connections during angiogenesis.

Loss ofnrarp-aandnrarp-bin Zebrafish andNrarpin Mouse Results in Ectopic Vessel Regression

Time-lapse confocal laser scanning microscopy of the morphants from 48 hpf onward revealed that disconnections result from EC retraction and consequent regression. In control morphants, the ISVs remained connected with the DA and the DLAV ( Figure 3I ; Movie S1 ). nrarp-a knockdown resulted in gradual regression of ISV from the existing DLAV ( Figure 3J ; Movie S2 ). Also, nrarp-b knockdown frequently led to regression of the ISV from the DA and also from the DLAV ( Figure 3K ; Movie S3 ). The observed dynamic regression may explain the missing ISVs occasionally observed in nrarp-a and nrarp-b morphants ( Figure 3G ).

In fixed tissue, empty basement membrane sleeves labeled for collagen IV but lacking endothelial markers faithfully highlight vessel regression ( Baffert et al., 2006 ). At the sprouting front of P5 Nrarp +/+ retinas, collagen IV colocalizes with endothelial Isolectin-B4 ( Figure 4A ) or Endomucin staining (data not shown), suggesting that newly formed vessels in the vicinity of high VEGF production rarely regress. In the more central plexus, most vessels show both collagen IV and Isolectin-B4 staining; however, closer to arteries, collagen IV profiles lacking Isolectin-B4 indicate regression profiles ( Figure S4 ). In P5 Nrarp +/− and Nrarp −/− retinas, we observed more vessel regression profiles in the remodeling plexus (arrowheads in Figure 4D ′ and 4E ; p < 0.0005), and also at the sprouting front (arrowheads in Figure 4B ), suggesting that Nrarp deficiency induces pruning even in regions of high VEGF stimulation. The observed vessel regression in the sprouting region could explain the delayed retinal vascularization and the reduced vascular density in Nrarp -deficient retinas.

EC adherens and tight junctions are essential for stabilization of vessel morphology and structure ( Blum et al., 2008 ; Corada et al., 1999 ). Claudin 5, an endothelial tight junction component, localizes to junctions along the length of patent vessels in a continuous manner ( Morita et al., 1999 ). During vessel regression, continuous junctions are disrupted and Claudin 5 redistributes to cytoplasmic vesicular structures ( Figure S4 ).

In Nrarp +/+ mice, a continuous network of junctions decorates the capillary plexus ( Figure 4C ), whereas in Nrarp −/− mice, the junctional network is fragmented with frequently isolated Claudin 5 strands and punctate structures ( Figures 4D and 4D ″).

Endothelial junctions are similarly disorganized between ISVs and DA in zebrafish nrarp-a and nrarp-b morphants. At 48 hpf in uninjected embryos, two ECs form two parallel strands that connect in a ring-shaped junction with ECs of the DA ( Figures 4F , 4F ′, and 4F ″), as revealed by zona occludens 1 (ZO1) staining ( Blum et al., 2008 ). In nrarp-a and b morphants, we frequently observe single junctional strands without ring-shaped connection to the DA ( Figures 4G , 4G ′, and 4G ″ and data not shown).

DISCUSSION

Our study of Nrarp function in mouse and zebrafish provides an insight into the mechanisms regulating vessel stability during sprouting angiogenesis: Dll4/Notch signaling induces expression of Nrarp in the stalk cells, where it differentially modulates Notch- and Wnt signaling activity to balance stalk cell proliferation and maintain vessel stability during network formation.

The increase in NICD levels and Notch target gene expression in Nrarp −/− retinas and isolated ECs is in line with earlier findings illustrating that Nrarp negatively regulates Notch signaling by promoting NICD degradation ( Ishitani et al., 2005 ; Lamar et al., 2001 ; Yun and Bevan, 2003 ). Dll4-Notch signaling induces Nrarp expression, and siRNA-mediated knockdown of NRARP in HUVECs augments activity of the TP-1 luciferase Notch-signaling reporter. Thus, increased Notch signaling in endothelial stalk cells correlates with vessel regression, whereas reduced Notch signaling in the stalk leads to formation of a new tip cell ( Hellstrom et al., 2007b ; Leslie et al., 2007 ; Lobov et al., 2007 ; Suchting et al., 2007 ). Balancing Notch activity could therefore regulate the fate of endothelial stalk cells: deciding whether to add a new branch or to take away an existing branch.

VEGF-A and Notch signaling engage in a feedback loop controlling reiterative induction, elongation, branching, and anastomosis of vascular sprouts ( Hellstrom et al., 2007a ; Leslie et al., 2007 ). Vascular pruning occurs subsequently in regions of lower VEGF-A, and oxygenation-dependent reduction of VEGF-A levels is a contributing factor ( Claxton and Fruttiger, 2003 , 2005 ). Blocking VEGF-A signaling in adult mice appears sufficient to induce rapid vessel pruning ( Baffert et al., 2006 ; Inai et al., 2004 ). In Nrarp −/− retinas, however, excessive vessel regression occurs in regions of high VEGF-A expression concomitant with sprouting, suggesting that the loss of Nrarp disables a molecular pathway that normally stabilizes vessels under VEGF-A stimulation. Several groups reported regulation of VEGF receptor expression through Notch signaling. Vegfr2 expression is induced by VEGF-A and downregulated in ECs through Notch signaling ( Harrington et al., 2007 ). Thus, vascular regression in Nrarp −/− retinas could be mediated by Notch-dependent repression of Vegfr2 . However, qPCR analysis showed normal VEGF-A and slightly increased Vegfr2 expression in Nrarp −/− retinas ( Figure S13 ). VEGFR1 (Flt1), which functions as a high-affinity decoy receptor for VEGF-A, is upregulated by Notch signaling ( Harrington et al., 2007 ). Nrarp − / − retinas express higher levels of Flt1 mRNA ( Figure S10 ), suggesting that enhanced Flt1-mediated sequestration of VEGF-A could contribute to the reduced EC proliferation and vessel density.

Vessel stability further requires pericyte investment, the loss of which leads to selective vessel regression ( Hammes et al., 2002 ). Nrarp mRNA was not detected in retinal pericytes, and vessel regression in Nrarp − / − retinas occurs despite apparently normal pericyte recruitment ( Figure S11 ), suggesting that the vascular phenotype in Nrarp − / − retinas reflects an EC-autonomous role of Nrarp in vessel stabilization.

Our observations illustrate that the cellular mechanism of vessel regression involves reduced endothelial proliferation and excessive junctional remodeling. Activation of Notch signaling in ECs induces cell cycle arrest through retinoblastoma protein dephosphorylation and downregulation of p21CIP ( Noseda et al., 2004 ). Wnt signaling promotes EC proliferation ( Masckauchan et al., 2005 , 2006 ) and the Lef1/Ctnnb1 complex induces cell cycle progression through transcriptional activation of Cyclin D1 ( Shtutman et al., 1999 ). Isolated ECs from Nrarp − / − mice show increased expression of the Notch-target Hey2 and significantly reduced expression of Cyclin D1 ( Figure 6 ). Thus, Nrarp could drive endothelial stalk cell proliferation by limiting Notch-dependent cell cycle arrest and increasing Lef1/Wnt signaling-dependent Cyclin D1 levels. The function of Nrarp could therefore explain why endothelial stalk cells readily proliferate although they receive highest levels of Notch activation through Dll4 signaling from the leading tip cells.

The identity of the relevant Wnt ligands and Fzd receptors involved upstream of Lef1/Ctnnb1 in the retinal endothelial Wnt signaling modulated by Nrarp remain to be identified. The involvement of Lef1, Lrp5, and Ctnnb1 in vivo and the regulation of Wnt3a-dependent TOPFlash reporter activity by Nrarp ex vivo point toward canonical Wnt signaling as a regulator of stalk cell and branch point stability. A C-terminal truncating mutation in the Lrp5 gene, abrogating its activity in Wnt signaling, causes retinal vascular defects including collapsed lumen and attenuated vascularization ( Xia et al., 2008 ). Loss of Norrin-dependent activation of Fzd4 also causes defects in retinal vascularization ( Xu et al., 2004 ). Whereas Norrin, Fzd4, or Lrp5 deficiency leads to severe and persistent attenuation of retinal vascularization, most of the defects caused by the loss of Nrarp resolve after the first postnatal week. One conceivable explanation is that Nrarp is a modulator of Wnt signaling, the loss of which leads to reduced signaling as opposed to complete loss caused by deletion of upstream components. Nevertheless, the loss of one allele of Nrarp already leads to vessel regression, and reducing NRARP expression by siRNA in HUVECs abrogates Wnt3a induced TOPFlash reporter activation.

Endothelial Ctnnb1 is required for vessel stability likely through interaction with Lef1 ( Figure 6 ). Constitutive activation of one or two copies of the Ctnnb1 lox(Ex3) allele ( Harada et al., 1999 ) in Nrarp − / − mice using the tamoxifen-inducible Pdgfb-iCreER line did not consistently reduce the regression ( Figure S12 ), suggesting that Ctnnb1 activation is required for vessel stability but is not sufficient in the absence of Nrarp.

In conclusion, we propose, based on our study of Nrarp function in mouse and zebrafish, that Wnt and Notch pathways integrate in endothelial stalk cells of newly formed vessels to control vascular sprouting and regression in angiogenesis.
