---
pmid: '16280321'
title: The heat shock protein 90-CDC37 chaperone complex is required for signaling
  by types I and II interferons.
authors:
- Shang L
- Tomasi TB
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M509901200
---

# The heat shock protein 90-CDC37 chaperone complex is required for signaling by types I and II interferons.
**Authors:** Shang L, Tomasi TB
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M509901200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M509901200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 27;281(4):1876-84. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M509901200. Epub
2005  Nov 9.

The heat shock protein 90-CDC37 chaperone complex is required for signaling by 
types I and II interferons.

Shang L(1), Tomasi TB.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Department of Immunology, Roswell Park 
Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

Interferon signaling pathways are critical to both innate and adaptive immunity. 
We have demonstrated here that the inhibition of heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) 
functions by small interfering RNAs or chemical inhibitors blocking 
interferon-induced gene expression. Hsp90 was required for signal transducers 
and activators of transcription 1 phosphorylation, and in its absence, Janus 
kinase (JAK) 1/2 were degraded by the proteosome. JAK1 interacts with Hsp90 and 
the CDC37 co-chaperone, and both interactions are destabilized by Hsp90 
inhibitors. The biological consequences were suggested by experiments showing 
that T cell activation by interferon-gamma-primed macrophages and the antiviral 
response of interferons required Hsp90. We conclude that JAK1/2 are client 
proteins of Hsp90 and that Hsp90 and CDC37 play a critical role in types I and 
II interferon pathways.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M509901200
PMID: 16280321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
