---
pmid: '15361868'
title: Interferon-alpha induction through Toll-like receptors involves a direct interaction
  of IRF7 with MyD88 and TRAF6.
authors:
- Kawai T
- Sato S
- Ishii KJ
- Coban C
- Hemmi H
- Yamamoto M
- Terai K
- Matsuda M
- Inoue J
- Uematsu S
- Takeuchi O
- Akira S
journal: Nat Immunol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ni1118
---

# Interferon-alpha induction through Toll-like receptors involves a direct interaction of IRF7 with MyD88 and TRAF6.
**Authors:** Kawai T, Sato S, Ishii KJ, Coban C, Hemmi H, Yamamoto M, Terai K, Matsuda M, Inoue J, Uematsu S, Takeuchi O, Akira S
**Journal:** Nat Immunol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ni1118](https://doi.org/10.1038/ni1118)

## Abstract

1. Nat Immunol. 2004 Oct;5(10):1061-8. doi: 10.1038/ni1118. Epub 2004 Sep 7.

Interferon-alpha induction through Toll-like receptors involves a direct 
interaction of IRF7 with MyD88 and TRAF6.

Kawai T(1), Sato S, Ishii KJ, Coban C, Hemmi H, Yamamoto M, Terai K, Matsuda M, 
Inoue J, Uematsu S, Takeuchi O, Akira S.

Author information:
(1)ERATO, Akira Innate Immunity Program, Japan Science and Technology Agency, 
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, 3-1 Yamada-oka, 
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are involved in the recognition of microbial 
pathogens. A subset of TLRs, TLR7, TLR8 and TLR9, induces antiviral responses by 
producing interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha). Production of IFN-alpha is dependent on 
the Toll-interleukin-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor MyD88. Here we show 
that MyD88 formed a complex with the transcription factor IRF7 but not with 
IRF3. The death domain of MyD88 interacted with an inhibitory domain of IRF7, 
and this interaction resulted in activation of the IFN-alpha-dependent 
promoters. Furthermore, the adaptor molecule TRAF6 also bound and activated 
IRF7. Ubiquitin ligase activity of TRAF6 was required for IRF7 activation. These 
results indicate that TLR-mediated IFN-alpha induction requires the formation of 
a complex consisting of MyD88, TRAF6 and IRF7 as well as TRAF6-dependent 
ubiquitination.

DOI: 10.1038/ni1118
PMID: 15361868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
