---
pmid: '25637936'
title: The terminal enzymes of cholesterol synthesis, DHCR24 and DHCR7, interact physically
  and functionally.
authors:
- Luu W
- Hart-Smith G
- Sharpe LJ
- Brown AJ
journal: J Lipid Res
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4373745
doi: 10.1194/jlr.M056986
---

# The terminal enzymes of cholesterol synthesis, DHCR24 and DHCR7, interact physically and functionally.
**Authors:** Luu W, Hart-Smith G, Sharpe LJ, Brown AJ
**Journal:** J Lipid Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1194/jlr.M056986](https://doi.org/10.1194/jlr.M056986)
**PMC:** [PMC4373745](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4373745/)

## Abstract

1. J Lipid Res. 2015 Apr;56(4):888-97. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M056986. Epub 2015 Jan
31.

The terminal enzymes of cholesterol synthesis, DHCR24 and DHCR7, interact 
physically and functionally.

Luu W(1), Hart-Smith G(1), Sharpe LJ(1), Brown AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, The University of New 
South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia.

Erratum in
    J Lipid Res. 2015 May;56(5):1079. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M056986ERR.

Cholesterol is essential to human health, and its levels are tightly regulated 
by a balance of synthesis, uptake, and efflux. Cholesterol synthesis requires 
the actions of more than twenty enzymes to reach the final product, through two 
alternate pathways. Here we describe a physical and functional interaction 
between the two terminal enzymes. 24-Dehydrocholesterol reductase (DHCR24) and 
7-dehydrocholesterol reductase (DHCR7) coimmunoprecipitate, and when the DHCR24 
gene is knocked down by siRNA, DHCR7 activity is also ablated. Conversely, 
overexpression of DHCR24 enhances DHCR7 activity, but only when a functional 
form of DHCR24 is used. DHCR7 is important for both cholesterol and vitamin D 
synthesis, and we have identified a novel layer of regulation, whereby its 
activity is controlled by DHCR24. This suggests the existence of a cholesterol 
"metabolon", where enzymes from the same metabolic pathway interact with each 
other to provide a substrate channeling benefit. We predict that other enzymes 
in cholesterol synthesis may similarly interact, and this should be explored in 
future studies.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
Inc.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.M056986
PMCID: PMC4373745
PMID: 25637936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Cholesterol is essential to human health, and its levels are tightly regulated by a balance of synthesis, uptake, and efflux. Cholesterol synthesis requires the actions of more than twenty enzymes to reach the final product, through two alternate pathways. Here we describe a physical and functional interaction between the two terminal enzymes. 24-Dehydrocholesterol reductase (DHCR24) and 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase (DHCR7) coimmunoprecipitate, and when the DHCR24 gene is knocked down by siRNA, DHCR7 activity is also ablated. Conversely, overexpression of DHCR24 enhances DHCR7 activity, but only when a functional form of DHCR24 is used. DHCR7 is important for both cholesterol and vitamin D synthesis, and we have identified a novel layer of regulation, whereby its activity is controlled by DHCR24. This suggests the existence of a cholesterol “metabolon”, where enzymes from the same metabolic pathway interact with each other to provide a substrate channeling benefit. We predict that other enzymes in cholesterol synthesis may similarly interact, and this should be explored in future studies.

DHCR24 deficiency results in lowered DHCR7 activity

As proof of concept, we employed a cell-line deficient in DHCR24, the mouse macrophage-like cells, J774A.1 ( 30 ). As expected, no DHCR24 activity was detected in these cells ( Fig. 5A ). While J774A.1 cells were able to convert deuterated 7DHC to cholesterol, their DHCR7 activity was much lower compared with our model cell-line, CHO-7 ( Fig. 5B ).

DISCUSSION

In this study, we found that the two terminal enzymes of cholesterol synthesis interact physically ( Table 1 , Fig. 2 ) and functionally ( Figs. 3 , 4 ). Knockdown of DHCR24 decreased DHCR7 activity but did not completely impair its function, suggesting that DHCR24 aids DHCR7 function, but is not essential for it. This contention was supported by overexpression of DHCR24 further increasing DHCR7 activity, but only when functional DHCR24 was used.

We have uncovered a novel layer of regulation in cholesterol synthesis. Previously, virtually nothing was known about the posttranscriptional regulation of DHCR7, although it has recently been found that vitamin D inhibits DHCR7 activity in differentiated human keratinocytes through an unknown mechanism ( 31 ). Here, we have discovered that the activity levels of the alternate terminal enzyme, DHCR24, influences DHCR7 activity. Moreover, this is the first time that two mammalian cholesterol synthesis enzymes have been shown to interact, but we expect that many others also interact, probably in a coordinated fashion. Because DHCR7 and DHCR24 act sequentially in the Bloch pathway ( Fig. 1 ), it is possible that their interaction provides a simple way for intermediates to be moved from one enzyme to the next. In this way, it may be expected that something of a “daisy chain” may be formed, where each enzyme interacts with both its preceding and subsequent enzymes.

This concept of enzymes from the same pathway interacting with their related enzymes (metabolon) has also been hypothesized for other metabolic pathways. For example, there is some experimental evidence for enzyme complexes forming in glycolysis, but the full details are yet to be elucidated [reviewed in ( 32 )]. One of the evolutionary advantages suggested is similar to our hypothesis, the channeling of substrates. Physical interactions between five enzymes in the TCA cycle have also been observed in Bacillus subtilis ( 33 ), and again the authors suggested substrate channeling as a likely benefit.

Although evidence points toward the existence of metabolons, it has been suggested that these interactions are hard to detect using high-throughput assays because they only weakly or transiently interact under normal circumstances, and their assembly is regulated as required ( 34 ). This helps explain why we did not observe a stoichiometric interaction between DHCR24 and DHCR7 in our coimmunoprecipitation approach (apart from the fact that only a proportion of the cells would be transfected with the DHCR7 expression plasmid). We would expect only a subset of DHCR24 to be interacting with DHCR7 at any given time.

As DHCR24 is positioned not only at the end of the Bloch pathway but also at the gateway of the Kandutsch-Russell pathway, attuning its activity with the last step of this pathway (DHCR7) would ensure concerted control of cholesterol synthesis. Moreover, as 7DHC can be converted into cholesterol or vitamin D, DHCR7 represents a switch between these vital molecules in skin cells exposed to UVB, so it seems likely that this important branch point is regulated in some way.

In addition to DHCR24 acting at the start and end of each pathway, it is also able to act on any of the intermediates in the Bloch pathway to divert them into the Kandutsch-Russell pathway ( 35 ). This promiscuity may mean that it similarly interacts with other enzymes in the pathway, further promoting the metabolon concept. This possibility requires further investigation.

DHCR24 activity is regulated by a variety of factors, including side-chain oxysterols ( 19 ), progesterone ( 36 ), and phosphorylation ( 22 ). Based on our current work, these factors would also be expected to affect DHCR7 activity. Desmosterolosis resulting from DHCR24 deficiency is a very rare condition with only a handful of cases reported to date ( 13 ). We would predict that these patients would also have reduced DHCR7 activity, as we have observed in J774A.1 cells, which naturally lack DHCR24 ( Fig. 5 ).

The precise mechanism by which DHCR24 affects DHCR7 activity remains to be determined. Genetic depletion of DHCR24 did not affect gene expression of DHCR7 ( Fig. 3A ), but we cannot exclude the possibility that protein expression may be affected, perhaps occurring through destabilization. We were unable to detect endogenous DHCR7 protein levels using several different commercial antibodies, and we are currently exploring different avenues to address this important question. There may also be a role of altered flux through the pathway. For example, desmosterol accumulates when DHCR24 is silenced, as can be seen in the CHO-EV and mutant DHCR24 cells in Fig. 4B . Desmosterol or other sterols could influence DHCR7 activity. Another possibility is that DHCR24 influences DHCR7 allosterically. Further work is required to elucidate the precise mechanism through which DHCR24 and DHCR7 interact, and the role this plays in the overall regulation of the cholesterol synthesis pathway. These studies will be assisted as more structural information for DHCR24 ( 37 ) and DHCR7 ( 38 ) becomes available.
