---
pmid: '16257975'
title: The conserved Leu-724 residue is required for both serine phosphorylation and
  co-activator recruitment for Stat1-mediated transcription activation in response
  to interferon-gamma.
authors:
- Sun W
- Xu W
- Snyder M
- He W
- Ho H
- Ivashkiv LB
- Zhang JJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M505797200
---

# The conserved Leu-724 residue is required for both serine phosphorylation and co-activator recruitment for Stat1-mediated transcription activation in response to interferon-gamma.
**Authors:** Sun W, Xu W, Snyder M, He W, Ho H, Ivashkiv LB, Zhang JJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M505797200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M505797200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 23;280(51):41844-51. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M505797200. Epub 
2005 Oct 27.

The conserved Leu-724 residue is required for both serine phosphorylation and 
co-activator recruitment for Stat1-mediated transcription activation in response 
to interferon-gamma.

Sun W(1), Xu W, Snyder M, He W, Ho H, Ivashkiv LB, Zhang JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Medical College of 
Cornell University, New York, New York 10021, USA.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins, a family 
of latent cytoplasmic transcription factors, become activated in response to 
extracellular ligand binding to cell surface receptors through tyrosine 
phosphorylation. Concurrently, a serine phosphorylation event in the 
transcription activation domain (serine 727 for Stat1) occurs. This serine 
phosphorylation is essential for the maximal transcription activity of Stat1. 
Here we show that, in addition to the Ser-727 residue and its phosphorylation, 
the conserved Leu-724 residue is also essential for gene activation mediated by 
Stat1. When Leu-724 is mutated to Ala, phosphorylation of Stat1 Ser-727 is 
defective both in vivo and in vitro. Surprisingly, we found a StatL724I mutant 
that lacks transcription activity despite normal Ser-727 phosphorylation. 
Further analyses show that Leu-724, as well as the phospho-Ser-727, are 
essential for the recruitment of the transcription co-activator CBP/p300 to the 
promoters of Stat1 target genes. Our results demonstrate that the conserved 
Leu-724 residue is a key residue that controls the maximal transcription 
activities of Stat1 in IFN-gamma signaling.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M505797200
PMID: 16257975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
