---
pmid: '19303847'
title: The BRC repeats of BRCA2 modulate the DNA-binding selectivity of RAD51.
authors:
- Carreira A
- Hilario J
- Amitani I
- Baskin RJ
- Shivji MK
- Venkitaraman AR
- Kowalczykowski SC
journal: Cell
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2669112
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.02.019
---

# The BRC repeats of BRCA2 modulate the DNA-binding selectivity of RAD51.
**Authors:** Carreira A, Hilario J, Amitani I, Baskin RJ, Shivji MK, Venkitaraman AR, Kowalczykowski SC
**Journal:** Cell (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2009.02.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2009.02.019)
**PMC:** [PMC2669112](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2669112/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2009 Mar 20;136(6):1032-43. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.02.019.

The BRC repeats of BRCA2 modulate the DNA-binding selectivity of RAD51.

Carreira A(1), Hilario J, Amitani I, Baskin RJ, Shivji MK, Venkitaraman AR, 
Kowalczykowski SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

The breast cancer susceptibility protein, BRCA2, is essential for 
recombinational DNA repair. BRCA2 delivers RAD51 to double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) 
breaks through interaction with eight conserved, approximately 35 amino acid 
motifs, the BRC repeats. Here we show that the solitary BRC4 promotes assembly 
of RAD51 onto single-stranded DNA (ssDNA), but not dsDNA, to stimulate DNA 
strand exchange. BRC4 acts by blocking ATP hydrolysis and thereby maintaining 
the active ATP-bound form of the RAD51-ssDNA filament. Single-molecule 
visualization shows that BRC4 does not disassemble RAD51-dsDNA filaments but 
rather blocks nucleation of RAD51 onto dsDNA. Furthermore, this behavior is 
manifested by a domain of BRCA2 comprising all eight BRC repeats. These results 
establish that the BRC repeats modulate RAD51-DNA interaction in two opposing 
but functionally reinforcing ways: targeting active RAD51 to ssDNA and 
prohibiting RAD51 nucleation onto dsDNA. Thus, BRCA2 recruits RAD51 to DNA 
breaks and, we propose, the BRC repeats regulate DNA-binding selectivity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.02.019
PMCID: PMC2669112
PMID: 19303847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

The breast cancer susceptibility gene, BRCA2 , encodes a protein of 3,418 amino acids ( Wooster et al., 1995 ). BRCA2 is needed for DNA repair by homologous recombination ( Moynahan et al., 2001 ; Tutt et al., 2001 ), the predominant mechanism employed by cells to accurately repair double-strand breaks (DBSs). The inability to purify full-length BRCA2 protein has hampered analysis of its role in this essential biological process. However, crystallographic studies revealed that BRCA2 possesses both a DNA Binding Domain (DBD), with unique structural features for binding ssDNA and dsDNA ( Yang et al., 2002 ), and BRC repeats, which bind to the core of RAD51 by mimicking the structure of an adjacent RAD51 monomer ( Pellegrini et al., 2002 ). Electron microscopy uncovered two different loci for binding to RAD51, the N-terminal domain and the nucleotide binding core ( Galkin et al., 2005 ). In addition, another RAD51 binding site was mapped to the C-terminus of BRCA2 ( Esashi et al., 2007 ). Together, these results suggest that the intact BRCA2 protein might bind both DNA and RAD51, and deliver RAD51 to the sites of DNA breaks ( Kowalczykowski, 2005 ; Pellegrini et al., 2002 ; Shin et al., 2003 ; Yang et al., 2002 ).

The importance of the BRC motifs to BRCA2 function in the maintenance of genome integrity is supported by observations showing that point mutations within BRC which compromise interactions with RAD51 are found in individuals predisposed to breast cancer (Breast Cancer Information Core, http://research.nhgri.nih.gov/bic/ ). At least one BRC repeat, in concert with the DBD of BRCA2, is required for targeting RAD51 to ssDNA ( San Filippo et al., 2006 ). Moreover, a fusion of a BRC repeat with the large subunit of the human ssDNA-binding protein, Replication protein-A (RPA), is sufficient to suppress cellular defects found in brca2 mutant mammalian cells ( Saeki et al., 2006 ). In fact, exogenous expression of mutants deleted for the BRC repeats or with missense mutations that give rise to familial cancers eliminate the ability of BRCA2 to restore resistance to methyl methanesulphonate (MMS) ( Chen et al., 1998 ). However, apparently contradictory effects reported for the BRC repeats on RAD51 behavior have confounded molecular understanding of their function. For instance, BRC repeats are reported to both block assembly of the RAD51 nucleoprotein filament on dsDNA and to paradoxically stabilize the same nucleoprotein filament ( Chen et al., 1999 ; Davies et al., 2001 ; Galkin et al., 2005 ; Shivji et al., 2006 ). These seemingly disparate observations may simply reflect experimental differences amongst the various studies or, instead, they may suggest an unappreciated complexity in the mechanism by which the BRC repeats regulate RAD51 function. Here we use ensemble and single-molecule methods to examine the effects of the BRC4 repeat on RAD51 nucleoprotein filament assembly on both ssDNA and dsDNA. We uncover a dichotomy with regard to the effect of BRC4 and a BRCA2 domain including the eight repeats, BRCA2 BRC1-8 , on these two types of DNA: BRC4 and BRCA2 BRC1-8 stabilize filament formation on ssDNA, but prevent filament formation on dsDNA. The consequence of this control over DNA selection results in an enhancement of the DNA strand exchange activity of RAD51 protein by the BRC repeats that we propose is a function within the intact BRCA2 protein.

DISCUSSION

Taken together, our results show that both BRC4 alone and BRCA2 BRC1-8 can modulate RAD51 filament formation in two mutually reinforcing ways: stimulating the assembly on ssDNA and preventing nucleation onto dsDNA. This duality with regard to control of RAD51 nucleoprotein filament formation is, in turn, responsible for the regulation of RAD51-promoted DNA strand exchange. Our results demonstrate that the interaction of BRC4 with RAD51 is sufficient to enhance RAD51 filament assembly on ssDNA ( Figure 7A , step 1). This enhancement results from both an inhibition of ATP hydrolysis ( Figure 7A , step 2) and a stabilization of the ADP-bound form of the nucleoprotein filament ( Figure 7A , step 3). The combined consequence is to allow exchange for ATP within the filament rather than the dissociation of ADP-RAD51 from the ssDNA. The net effect is maintenance of a protein filament assembled on ssDNA in its ATP-bound form, which is the form that is required for DNA pairing function. In addition, BRC4 prevents a competing inhibitory reaction: namely, the nonfunctional assembly of RAD51 on dsDNA ( Figure 7B , step 4). BRC4 achieves this function by blocking the rate-limiting nucleation of filaments on dsDNA. The similar results obtained with a domain comprising the eight BRC repeats, BRCA2 BRC1-8 , previously shown to stimulate RAD51-mediated DNA strand exchange ( Shivji et al., 2006 ), support the conclusions obtained with the single BRC4 repeat, and they further suggest that the entire BRCA2 BRC1-8 domain behaves as a regulator of DNA binding much as BRC4.

Crystallographic analysis defined an interaction interface between BRC4 and RAD51 that involves the ATPase core of RAD51 and that mimics the intermonomer interactions within the filament ( Pellegrini et al., 2002 ). It was found that the nucleotide-binding site of RAD51adopts a more closed conformation when bound to BRC4, and the authors suggested that this conformation might, in turn, alter ATP occupancy. This interpretation could provide a structural explanation for the inhibition of the ATPase activity of RAD51 by BRC4 and the resultant stabilization of RAD51- ssDNA filaments if the ATP binding pocket closed with ATP bound and BRC4 prevented the conformational changes needed for ATP hydrolysis.

Paradoxically, BRC repeats were also shown both to disrupt RAD51 nucleoprotein filament formation on dsDNA and to bind to these nucleoprotein filaments. This seemingly contradictory outcome is likely a consequence of the two different binding modes reported for the BRC repeats: a mode that binds RAD51 in a monomeric state and another that binds the nucleoprotein filament, respectively ( Davies et al., 2001 ; Galkin et al., 2005 ; Pellegrini et al., 2002 ); a third interaction mode, described for the C-terminal region of BRCA2, reportedly involves oligomeric RAD51 binding ( Davies and Pellegrini, 2007 ; Esashi et al., 2007 ). Some prior studies are seemingly contradictory to some of the observations reported here, but our studies readily rationalize those findings. We showed that BRC4 will not inhibit RAD51 filament formation on dsDNA, unless the RAD51 is allowed to dissociate via ATP hydrolysis; once dissociated, however, our studies also show that reassembly of the dissociated RAD51 protein will be blocked by BRC4, leading to an apparent disruption of the ATP-nucleoprotein filaments. For this reason, nucleoprotein filaments formed on dsDNA in the presence of the non-hydrolysable analog, AMP-PNP, are much less affected by BRC repeats, whereas those assembled in the presence of ATP are apparently disrupted; however, these latter complexes are not, in fact, disrupted by the BRC repeat but, instead, they dissociate normally and their reassembly is blocked on a steady-state kinetic basis. In addition, BRC4 was found to inhibit the binding of RAD51 to longer ssDNA (e.g., poly(dT)) ( Davies and Pellegrini, 2007 ). However, here we discovered that there are two distinct regimes of BRC4 behavior with regard to RAD51 binding to ssDNA: stimulation at low concentrations of BRC4, and inhibition at high concentrations. Because RAD51 forms unstable complexes with short oligonucleotides, such as dT 40 or dT 60 , we can detect both the stimulatory regime and the inhibitory regime ( Figure 1 ). However, for longer ssDNA, the binding of RAD51 is stable (close to 100% binding); thus, the stimulatory behavior cannot be detected, and only the inhibitory behavior is seen. This dichotomous behavior resolves the apparent discrepancy with studies using ssDNA that forms stable complexes with RAD51.

It was recently reported that a peptide derived from the BRC repeat of BRCA2 can inhibit the binding of RAD51 to the fluorescently-modified ssDNA, poly(etheno-dA) ( Nomme et al., 2008 ); in agreement, we observed a similar behavior with M13 etheno-ssDNA (unpublished observations). We conclude that the fluorescent modification of these ssDNA substrates precludes the stimulation of binding seen for BRC4 with the unmodified ssDNA. Our results show that these distinct modes of action may have disparate consequences which depend on the type of DNA, single- or double-stranded, involved.

When considered in conjunction with previous work which showed that BRC repeats are necessary to target RAD51 to ssDNA ( San Filippo et al., 2006 ), our findings suggest that the dominant negative phenotype resulting from expression of the single BRC4 in vivo ( Chen et al., 1999 ) arises either from the inability of an isolated repeat, without the DNA binding domains of BRCA2, to efficiently deliver RAD51 to the site of a processed dsDNA break or from an inhibitory effect of excessive BRC4 expression. Consistent with the former interpretation, expression of a fusion of BRC4 and the ssDNA binding domain of a heterologous protein, RPA, restores recombinational DNA repair in mammalian cells to nearly wild-type levels ( Saeki et al., 2006 ). In agreement with the latter possibility, high concentrations of BRC4 block DNA strand exchange in vitro (Figure S5A and B).

The BRCA2-homologue from C. elegans , CeBRC2, which possesses a single BRC repeat, was reported to reduce the rate of ATP hydrolysis by CeRAD51 in vitro and to promote persistent CeRAD51 nucleoprotein focus formation in vivo ( Petalcorin et al., 2007 ). In agreement, here we showed that a single BRC repeat from the human BRCA2 is sufficient to stabilize the human RAD51-ssDNA nucleoprotein complex by decreasing ATP hydrolysis and by both stabilizing and increasing the fraction of active ATP-bound nucleoprotein filaments on ssDNA ( Figure 2B and C ). Collectively, the published reports and our results support the conclusion that BRC repeats enhance the DNA pairing activity of RAD51 by slowing ATP hydrolysis. Interestingly, a similar mechanism was invoked to explain the Ca 2+ -dependent stabilization of the RAD51-ssDNA filament and the consequent stimulation of DNA strand exchange ( Bugreev and Mazin, 2004 ). The accumulation of ATP-bound form of the filament by either Ca 2+ or BRC4 promotes formation of an active nucleoprotein filament on ssDNA that is necessary for DNA strand exchange. The interaction with BRC4 goes one step further: it limits the non-productive formation of filaments on dsDNA. Thus, BRC4 shows two different modes of interaction: one that stabilizes RAD51-ssDNA filaments by modulating ATPase activity and another that prevents nucleation of filaments on dsDNA ( Figure 7A and B ).

Further research will be required to understand how the BRC repeats and the C-terminal region orchestrate RAD51 nucleoprotein formation in the context of entire BRCA2 protein and throughout the cell cycle. However, our observations have revealed an unexpected dichotomy of the seemingly simple BRC repeats in controlling RAD51 nucleoprotein filament assembly that might be crucial for understanding the role of BRCA2 in the DNA damage response and repair. In Figure 7C , we illustrate the likely function of the intact BRCA2 protein. Duplex DNA that suffers a DSB is resected to produce ssDNA. The ssDNA is initially bound by RPA, precluding the binding of RAD51 and necessitating a catalyst to facilitate assembly of RAD51 on the ssDNA ( Sugiyama and Kowalczykowski, 2002 ). BRCA2 is proposed to bind to the ssDNA-dsDNA junction by virtue of its DNA binding domain, which comprises both ssDNA and dsDNA binding domains ( Yang et al., 2002 ; Yang et al., 2005 ). The BRC repeats recruit RAD51 to this junction, and load RAD51 onto the ssDNA, but they block its non-productive assembly onto dsDNA. The major role of BRCA2 is seen as nucleating the nucleoprotein filament near the junction by preventing turnover of the nascent nucleus of the ATP-bound RAD51 filament. Once a nascent filament forms, growth and RPA-displacement ensues, likely aided by other mediators such as RAD52 ( Benson et al., 1998 ; New et al., 1998 ; Shinohara and Ogawa, 1998 ; Sung, 1997 ; Sung et al., 2003 ).
