---
pmid: '17116431'
title: A role for Xrcc2 in the early stages of mouse development.
authors:
- Adam J
- Deans B
- Thacker J
journal: DNA Repair (Amst)
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2006.10.024
---

# A role for Xrcc2 in the early stages of mouse development.
**Authors:** Adam J, Deans B, Thacker J
**Journal:** DNA Repair (Amst) (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.dnarep.2006.10.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dnarep.2006.10.024)

## Abstract

1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2007 Feb 4;6(2):224-34. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2006.10.024. 
Epub 2006 Nov 20.

A role for Xrcc2 in the early stages of mouse development.

Adam J(1), Deans B, Thacker J.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council, Radiation & Genome Stability Unit, Harwell, 
Oxfordshire OX11 0RD, United Kingdom.

Xrcc2 is one of a family of five Rad51-like genes with important roles in the 
repair of DNA damage by homologous recombination (HR) in mammals. We have shown 
previously that loss of Xrcc2 in mice results in severe but variable 
developmental defects and embryonic lethality, potentially linked to excessive 
apoptosis. To look at the causes of lethality, and possibly to allow Xrcc2-/- 
mice to survive to birth, we have produced double knockout mice deficient in 
either the p53 oncoprotein or Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (Atm). Overall we 
show that the excessive apoptosis observed in Xrcc2-/- embryos is p53-dependent, 
and that loss of p53 can restore growth capacity to Xrcc2-/- fibroblasts in 
culture, but that it cannot rescue the embryonic lethality. Additionally, 
although the Xrcc2-/- Trp53-/- embryos show a near-normal morphology they remain 
relatively small in size. Loss of Atm in an Xrcc2-/- embryo has little effect, 
suggesting that response to loss of HR capacity is not mediated through the Atm 
kinase in the early stages of mouse development. Further, as seen by reduced 
expression of the early developmental marker, Delta-like1, the normal 
developmental programme is perturbed in Xrcc2-/- embryonic tissues, particularly 
during neurogenesis and somitogenesis. Taken together our data suggest that the 
accumulation of spontaneous damage in HR-deficient embryos has severe 
consequences for the development and survival of mammals due to the unregulated 
loss of cells important to the developmental programme.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2006.10.024
PMID: 17116431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
