---
pmid: '2554967'
title: Determination of the three-dimensional solution structure of the C-terminal
  domain of cellobiohydrolase I from Trichoderma reesei. A study using nuclear magnetic
  resonance and hybrid distance geometry-dynamical simulated annealing.
authors:
- Kraulis J
- Clore GM
- Nilges M
- Jones TA
- Pettersson G
- Knowles J
- Gronenborn AM
journal: Biochemistry
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi00444a016
---

# Determination of the three-dimensional solution structure of the C-terminal domain of cellobiohydrolase I from Trichoderma reesei. A study using nuclear magnetic resonance and hybrid distance geometry-dynamical simulated annealing.
**Authors:** Kraulis J, Clore GM, Nilges M, Jones TA, Pettersson G, Knowles J, Gronenborn AM
**Journal:** Biochemistry (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi00444a016](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi00444a016)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 1989 Sep 5;28(18):7241-57. doi: 10.1021/bi00444a016.

Determination of the three-dimensional solution structure of the C-terminal 
domain of cellobiohydrolase I from Trichoderma reesei. A study using nuclear 
magnetic resonance and hybrid distance geometry-dynamical simulated annealing.

Kraulis J(1), Clore GM, Nilges M, Jones TA, Pettersson G, Knowles J, Gronenborn 
AM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The solution structure of a synthetic 36-residue polypeptide comprising the 
C-terminal cellulose binding domain of cellobiohydrolase I (CT-CBH I) from 
Trichoderma reesei was investigated by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) 
spectroscopy. The 1H NMR spectrum was completely assigned in a sequential manner 
by two-dimensional NMR techniques. A large number of stereospecific assignments 
for beta-methylene protons, as well as ranges for the phi, psi, and chi 1 
torsion angles, were obtained on the basis of sequential and intraresidue 
nuclear Overhauser enhancement (NOE) and coupling constant data in combination 
with a conformational data base search. The structure calculations were carried 
out in an iterative manner by using the hybrid distance geometry-dynamical 
simulated annealing method. This involved computing a series of initial 
structures from a subset of the experimental data in order to resolve 
ambiguities in the assignments of some NOE cross-peaks arising from chemical 
shift degeneracy. Additionally, this permitted us to extend the stereospecific 
assignments to the alpha-methylene protons of glycine using information on phi 
torsion angles derived from the initial structure calculations. The final 
experimental data set consisted of 554 interproton distance restraints, 24 
restraints for 12 hydrogen bonds, and 33 phi, 24 psi, and 25 chi 1 torsion angle 
restraints. CT-CBH I has two disulfide bridges whose pairing was previously 
unknown. Analysis of structures calculated with all three possible combinations 
of disulfide bonds, as well as without disulfide bonds, indicated that the 
correct disulfide bridge pairing was 8-25 and 19-35. Forty-one structures were 
computed with the 8-25 and 19-35 disulfide bridges, and the average atomic rms 
difference between the individual structures and the mean structure obtained by 
averaging their coordinates was 0.33 +/- 0.04 A for the backbone atoms and 0.52 
+/- 0.06 A for all atoms. The protein has a wedgelike shape with an amphiphilic 
character, one face being predominantly hydrophilic and the other mainly 
hydrophobic. The principal element of secondary structure is made up of an 
irregular triple-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet composed of residues 5-9 (beta 
1), 24-28 (beta 2), and 33-36 (beta 3) in which strand beta 3 is hydrogen bonded 
to the other two strands.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1021/bi00444a016
PMID: 2554967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
