---
pmid: '12457401'
title: Desmosterolosis presenting with multiple congenital anomalies and profound
  developmental delay.
authors:
- Andersson HC
- Kratz L
- Kelley R
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.b.10873
---

# Desmosterolosis presenting with multiple congenital anomalies and profound developmental delay.
**Authors:** Andersson HC, Kratz L, Kelley R
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.b.10873](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.b.10873)

## Abstract

1. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Dec 15;113(4):315-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.b.10873.

Desmosterolosis presenting with multiple congenital anomalies and profound 
developmental delay.

Andersson HC(1), Kratz L, Kelley R.

Author information:
(1)Hayward Genetics Center and Department of Pediatrics, Tulane University 
Medical School, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USA. handers@tulane.edu

Desmosterol (cholesta-5,24-dien-3beta-ol) is a minor sterol that forms as an 
intermediate in the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway when the 24-unsaturated 
sterol bond is reduced as the last step rather than earlier in the conversion of 
lanosterol to cholesterol. In 1998, FitzPatrick et al. reported a premature 
infant who died shortly after birth and had marked tissue elevations of 
desmosterol and a strikingly abnormal phenotype. We describe here the first 
living patient with desmosterolosis and show biochemical evidence in plasma and 
cultured lymphoblasts for an autosomal recessive deficiency of 
24-dehydrocholesterol reductase (DHCR24). The infant has severe microcephaly, 
agenesis of the corpus callosum, downslanting palpebral fissures, micrognathia, 
submucous cleft palate, clubfoot, and a persistent patent ductus arteriosus. 
Plasma sterol quantification in the patient at age 2 years demonstrated a normal 
cholesterol level, but a 100-fold increased level of desmosterol (60 mcg/ml; nl 
0.5 +/- 0.3 mcg/ml (SD)) suggesting deficient activity of 24-dehydrocholesterol 
(desmosterol) reductase (DHCR24). Both parents had mildly increased levels of 
desmosterol in plasma (mother: 1.4 mcg/ml; father: 1.8 mcg/ml), consistent with 
heterozygosity for DHCR24 deficiency. Analysis of sterol metabolism in cultured 
transformed lymphoblasts showed a 100-fold increased level of desmosterol and a 
moderately decreased level of cholesterol in the patient's cells and a 10-fold 
elevation of desmosterol in the mother's cells. At the age of 3.5 years, the 
patient stands but does not walk, uses a 5-word vocabulary, and lacks any major 
medical problems. This unique patient broadens the spectrum of inborn errors of 
cholesterol biosynthesis and suggests additional candidate clinical phenotypes 
associated with abnormal cholesterol metabolism.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.10873
PMID: 12457401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
