---
pmid: '11397809'
title: IRAK1b, a novel alternative splice variant of interleukin-1 receptor-associated
  kinase (IRAK), mediates interleukin-1 signaling and has prolonged stability.
authors:
- Jensen LE
- Whitehead AS
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M103815200
---

# IRAK1b, a novel alternative splice variant of interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase (IRAK), mediates interleukin-1 signaling and has prolonged stability.
**Authors:** Jensen LE, Whitehead AS
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M103815200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M103815200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 3;276(31):29037-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M103815200. Epub
2001  Jun 7.

IRAK1b, a novel alternative splice variant of interleukin-1 receptor-associated 
kinase (IRAK), mediates interleukin-1 signaling and has prolonged stability.

Jensen LE(1), Whitehead AS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Center for Pharmacogenetics, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. jensen@pharm.med.upenn.edu

Interleukin-1 (IL-1) is a pleiotropic cytokine essential for initiation of the 
immune response to infections and stress. IL-1 interacts with its type I 
receptor (IL-1RI) and triggers a number of intracellular signaling cascades 
leading to activation of transcription factors, transcriptional up-regulation of 
target genes, and mRNA stabilization. IL-1RI-associated kinase-1 (IRAK1) is a 
membrane proximal serine-threonine kinase involved in IL-1 signaling that 
becomes phosphorylated and progressively degraded in response to IL-1 induction. 
We have identified a novel variant of IRAK1, which we have named IRAK1b, that 
arises from the use of an alternative 5'-acceptor splice site defined by 
sequence within exon 12 of IRAK1. IRAK1b mRNA exhibits wide tissue expression 
and is evolutionarily conserved in both mouse and human. IRAK1b can activate the 
transcription factor nuclear factor kappaB and interacts with the IL-1 signaling 
factors Toll-interacting protein and tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated 
factor 6. It forms homodimers and heterodimers with the previously described 
isoform of IRAK1. We show that the IRAK1b protein is kinase-inactive and that, 
unlike IRAK1, its levels remain constant after IL-1 induction. The presence of 
an alternative splice variant of IRAK1, which is functionally active and highly 
stable following IL-1 stimulation, adds further complexity to the control 
mechanisms that govern IL-1 signaling.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M103815200
PMID: 11397809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
