---
pmid: '22773655'
title: Mercury resistance and mercuric reductase activities and expression among chemotrophic
  thermophilic Aquificae.
authors:
- Freedman Z
- Zhu C
- Barkay T
journal: Appl Environ Microbiol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3426723
doi: 10.1128/AEM.01060-12
---

# Mercury resistance and mercuric reductase activities and expression among chemotrophic thermophilic Aquificae.
**Authors:** Freedman Z, Zhu C, Barkay T
**Journal:** Appl Environ Microbiol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1128/AEM.01060-12](https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.01060-12)
**PMC:** [PMC3426723](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3426723/)

## Abstract

1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2012 Sep;78(18):6568-75. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01060-12.
Epub  2012 Jul 6.

Mercury resistance and mercuric reductase activities and expression among 
chemotrophic thermophilic Aquificae.

Freedman Z(1), Zhu C, Barkay T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Rutgers University, New 
Brunswick, New Jersey, USA.

Mercury (Hg) resistance (mer) by the reduction of mercuric to elemental Hg is 
broadly distributed among the Bacteria and Archaea and plays an important role 
in Hg detoxification and biogeochemical cycling. MerA is the protein subunit of 
the homodimeric mercuric reductase (MR) enzyme, the central function of the mer 
system. MerA sequences in the phylum Aquificae form the deepest-branching 
lineage in Bayesian phylogenetic reconstructions of all known MerA homologs. We 
therefore hypothesized that the merA homologs in two thermophilic Aquificae, 
Hydrogenobaculum sp. strain Y04AAS1 (AAS1) and Hydrogenivirga sp. strain 
128-5-R1-1 (R1-1), specified Hg resistance. Results supported this hypothesis, 
because strains AAS1 and R1-1 (i) were resistant to >10 μM Hg(II), (ii) 
transformed Hg(II) to Hg(0) during cellular growth, and (iii) possessed 
Hg-dependent NAD(P)H oxidation activities in crude cell extracts that were 
optimal at temperatures corresponding with the strains' optimal growth 
temperatures, 55°C for AAS1 and 70°C for R1-1. While these characteristics all 
conformed with the mer system paradigm, expression of the Aquificae mer operons 
was not induced by exposure to Hg(II) as indicated by unity ratios of merA 
transcripts, normalized to gyrA transcripts for hydrogen-grown AAS1 cultures, 
and by similar MR specific activities in thiosulfate-grown cultures with and 
without Hg(II). The Hg(II)-independent expression of mer in the 
deepest-branching lineage of MerA from bacteria whose natural habitats are 
Hg-rich geothermal environments suggests that regulated expression of mer was a 
later innovation likely in environments where microorganisms were intermittently 
exposed to toxic concentrations of Hg.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01060-12
PMCID: PMC3426723
PMID: 22773655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Mercury (Hg) resistance ( mer ) by the reduction of mercuric to elemental Hg is broadly distributed among the Bacteria and Archaea and plays an important role in Hg detoxification and biogeochemical cycling. MerA is the protein subunit of the homodimeric mercuric reductase (MR) enzyme, the central function of the mer system. MerA sequences in the phylum Aquificae form the deepest-branching lineage in Bayesian phylogenetic reconstructions of all known MerA homologs. We therefore hypothesized that the merA homologs in two thermophilic Aquificae , Hydrogenobaculum sp. strain Y04AAS1 (AAS1) and Hydrogenivirga sp. strain 128-5-R1-1 (R1-1), specified Hg resistance. Results supported this hypothesis, because strains AAS1 and R1-1 (i) were resistant to >10 μM Hg(II), (ii) transformed Hg(II) to Hg(0) during cellular growth, and (iii) possessed Hg-dependent NAD(P)H oxidation activities in crude cell extracts that were optimal at temperatures corresponding with the strains' optimal growth temperatures, 55°C for AAS1 and 70°C for R1-1. While these characteristics all conformed with the mer system paradigm, expression of the Aquificae mer operons was not induced by exposure to Hg(II) as indicated by unity ratios of merA transcripts, normalized to gyrA transcripts for hydrogen-grown AAS1 cultures, and by similar MR specific activities in thiosulfate-grown cultures with and without Hg(II). The Hg(II)-independent expression of mer in the deepest-branching lineage of MerA from bacteria whose natural habitats are Hg-rich geothermal environments suggests that regulated expression of mer was a later innovation likely in environments where microorganisms were intermittently exposed to toxic concentrations of Hg.

INTRODUCTION

Microbes must have been exposed to toxic heavy metals since the beginning of life on Earth and have evolved diverse mechanisms to live in the presence of high concentrations of toxic metal ions ( 42 ). These mechanisms, such as efflux, intra- or extracellular precipitation, and enzyme-mediated transformations, control intracellular concentrations of heavy metal ions that may be inhibitory to physiological functions and form nonspecific complex compounds in the cell ( 28 ). While much of our existing knowledge of these resistance mechanisms has arisen from research motivated by metal contamination from the perspective of human and environmental health ( 5 , 9 , 11 , 26 , 29 ), a cosmopolitan distribution of metal-resistant microorganisms inhabiting environments that are enriched with metals of geological origin suggests evolution of metal ion resistance prior to industrial release of metal contaminants ( 2 , 13 , 50 ).

Mercury (Hg) is a potent neurotoxic substance and the heavy metal most toxic to microorganisms due to its high affinity to sulfur ( 27 ). Globally distributed Hg ( 3 ) is toxic to humans and wildlife, mostly due to the accumulation of methylmercury (MeHg) in aquatic and terrestrial food webs ( 7 ). Microbial activities are central in modulating environmental Hg toxicity and mobility. Resistance to inorganic Hg [Hg(II)] is controlled by the activities of the enzyme mercuric reductase (MR), an NAD(P)H-dependent flavin oxidoreductase which catalyzes the reduction of Hg(II) to the elemental form, Hg(0). The gene encoding MR, merA , is part of the Hg resistance ( mer ) operon, which is widespread among both Bacteria and Archaea ( 2 , 3 , 43 ), allowing these organisms to survive in the presence of elevated Hg concentrations ( 3 , 4 ). At a minimum, Hg resistance systems are comprised of transport, enzymatic, and regulatory functions. MerT and a number of alternative transporters are involved in the transport of thiolated Hg(II) into the cytoplasm for reduction by MR ( 3 ). MerR regulates expression of the mer operon, binding to the operator/promoter (O/P) region to repress transcription in the absence of Hg(II). When present, Hg(II) binds to the MerR- mer O/P and RNA polymerase complex, prompting the DNA to unwind, inducing transcription of the operon's functional genes ( 3 , 17 ).

A recent body of literature supports the hypothesis that microbial resistance to Hg evolved in geothermal environments where microbial life has perhaps been exposed to Hg since the beginning of life on Earth ( 2 , 35 , 48 ). Mercury-resistant microbes were readily isolated from deep-sea hydrothermal vents ( 48 ) and terrestrial hot springs ( 10 , 43 ), and their distribution suggested a role in adaptation to Hg toxicity. Culture-independent techniques detected mer genes in Yellowstone National Park (YNP) ( 50 ) and Coso Hot Springs, CA ( 43 ). The large-scale sequencing of microbial genomes has resulted in an increased availability of merA sequences and allowed for a robust analysis of gene evolution, further supporting an origin and early evolution of Hg resistance among thermophilic microbes from geothermal environments ( 2 ).

To date, functional mer operons have been characterized in mesophilic Actinobacteria , in Firmicutes , among the Beta- and Gammaproteobacteria ( 2 ), and in one thermophilic bacterium representing an early bacterial lineage, Thermus thermophilus HB27 ( 51 ). The phylum Aquificae contains primary producers which are dominant in many geothermal environments ( 46 ) and represents the deepest-branching bacterial lineage ( 23 ). Furthermore, merA homologs in the genomes of Hydrogenobaculum sp. strain Y04AAS1 (AAS1) and Hydrogenivirga sp. strain 128-5-R1-1 (R1-1) ( 34 ) form the deepest-branching lineage in a MerA phylogeny ( 2 ). Strain AAS1 was isolated from a small channel proximal to Obsidian Pool Prime, YNP, and R1-1 was isolated from the Eastern Lau Spreading Center, South Pacific ( 34 ), both of which are geothermal environments similar to those where elevated Hg concentrations were reported ( 12 , 21 , 31 ). The basal position of the Aquificae loci in the MerA phylogenetic reconstructions suggests that merA originated in an ancestor common to deep-branching thermophilic bacteria. Here, we report on the activity and characteristics of the Hg resistance systems of two Aquificae strains representing chemotrophic primary producers in many geothermal environments.
