---
pmid: '9346484'
title: 'IKK-1 and IKK-2: cytokine-activated IkappaB kinases essential for NF-kappaB
  activation.'
authors:
- Mercurio F
- Zhu H
- Murray BW
- Shevchenko A
- Bennett BL
- Li J
- Young DB
- Barbosa M
- Mann M
- Manning A
- Rao A
journal: Science
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.278.5339.860
---

# IKK-1 and IKK-2: cytokine-activated IkappaB kinases essential for NF-kappaB activation.
**Authors:** Mercurio F, Zhu H, Murray BW, Shevchenko A, Bennett BL, Li J, Young DB, Barbosa M, Mann M, Manning A, Rao A
**Journal:** Science (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.278.5339.860](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.278.5339.860)

## Abstract

1. Science. 1997 Oct 31;278(5339):860-6. doi: 10.1126/science.278.5339.860.

IKK-1 and IKK-2: cytokine-activated IkappaB kinases essential for NF-kappaB 
activation.

Mercurio F(1), Zhu H, Murray BW, Shevchenko A, Bennett BL, Li J, Young DB, 
Barbosa M, Mann M, Manning A, Rao A.

Author information:
(1)Signal Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 5555 Oberlin Drive, San Diego, CA 92121, USA. 
fmercuri@signalpharm.com

Comment in
    Science. 1997 Oct 31;278(5339):818-9. doi: 10.1126/science.278.5339.818.

Activation of the transcription factor nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) is 
controlled by sequential phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and degradation of its 
inhibitory subunit IkappaB. A large multiprotein complex, the IkappaB kinase 
(IKK) signalsome, was purified from HeLa cells and found to contain a 
cytokine-inducible IkappaB kinase activity that phosphorylates IkappaB-alpha and 
IkappaB-beta. Two components of the IKK signalsome, IKK-1 and IKK-2, were 
identified as closely related protein serine kinases containing leucine zipper 
and helix-loop-helix protein interaction motifs. Mutant versions of IKK-2 had 
pronounced effects on RelA nuclear translocation and NF-kappaB-dependent 
reporter activity, consistent with a critical role for the IKK kinases in the 
NF-kappaB signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1126/science.278.5339.860
PMID: 9346484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
