---
pmid: '10094636'
title: D-Erythroascorbic acid is an important antioxidant molecule in Saccharomyces
  cerevisiae.
authors:
- Huh WK
- Lee BH
- Kim ST
- Kim YR
- Rhie GE
- Baek YW
- Hwang CS
- Lee JS
- Kang SO
journal: Mol Microbiol
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1998.01133.x
---

# D-Erythroascorbic acid is an important antioxidant molecule in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Huh WK, Lee BH, Kim ST, Kim YR, Rhie GE, Baek YW, Hwang CS, Lee JS, Kang SO
**Journal:** Mol Microbiol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-2958.1998.01133.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2958.1998.01133.x)

## Abstract

1. Mol Microbiol. 1998 Nov;30(4):895-903. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1998.01133.x.

D-Erythroascorbic acid is an important antioxidant molecule in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae.

Huh WK(1), Lee BH, Kim ST, Kim YR, Rhie GE, Baek YW, Hwang CS, Lee JS, Kang SO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Natural Sciences, and Research Center 
for Molecular Microbiology, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea.

D-Arabinono-1,4-lactone oxidase catalysing the final step of D-erythroascorbic 
acid biosynthesis was purified from the mitochondrial fraction of Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae. Based on the amino acid sequence analysis of the enzyme, an unknown 
open reading frame (ORF), YML086C, was identified as the ALO1 gene encoding the 
enzyme. The ORF of ALO1 encoded a polypeptide consisting of 526 amino acids with 
a calculated molecular mass of 59493Da. The deduced amino acid sequence of the 
enzyme shared 32% and 21% identity with that of L-gulono-1,4-lactone oxidase 
from rat and L-galactono-1,4-lactone dehydrogenase from cauliflower, 
respectively, and contained a putative transmembrane segment and a covalent FAD 
binding site. Blot hybridization analyses showed that a single copy of the gene 
was present in the yeast genome and that mRNA of the ALO1 gene was 1.8kb in 
size. In the alo1 mutants, D-erythroascorbic acid and the activity of 
D-arabinono-1,4-lactone oxidase could not be detected. The intracellular 
concentration of D-erythroascorbic acid and the enzyme activity increased up to 
6.9-fold and 7.3-fold, respectively, in the transformant cells carrying ALO1 in 
multicopy plasmid. The alo1 mutants showed increased sensitivity towards 
oxidative stress, but overexpression of ALO1 made the cells more resistant to 
oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1998.01133.x
PMID: 10094636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
