---
pmid: '22689984'
title: Cdc28 kinase activity regulates the basal transcription machinery at a subset
  of genes.
authors:
- Chymkowitch P
- Eldholm V
- Lorenz S
- Zimmermann C
- Lindvall JM
- Bjørås M
- Meza-Zepeda LA
- Enserink JM
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC3387082
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1200067109
---

# Cdc28 kinase activity regulates the basal transcription machinery at a subset of genes.
**Authors:** Chymkowitch P, Eldholm V, Lorenz S, Zimmermann C, Lindvall JM, Bjørås M, Meza-Zepeda LA, Enserink JM
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1200067109](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1200067109)
**PMC:** [PMC3387082](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3387082/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 26;109(26):10450-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1200067109. Epub 2012 Jun 11.

Cdc28 kinase activity regulates the basal transcription machinery at a subset of 
genes.

Chymkowitch P(1), Eldholm V, Lorenz S, Zimmermann C, Lindvall JM, Bjørås M, 
Meza-Zepeda LA, Enserink JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Microbiology, and Centre for 
Molecular Biology and Neuroscience, Oslo University Hospital, Sognsvannsveien 
20, NO-0027 Oslo, Norway.

The cyclin-dependent kinase Cdc28 is the master regulator of the cell cycle in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Cdc28 initiates the cell cycle by activating 
cell-cycle-specific transcription factors that switch on a transcriptional 
program during late G1 phase. Cdc28 also has a cell-cycle-independent, direct 
function in regulating basal transcription, which does not require its catalytic 
activity. However, the exact role of Cdc28 in basal transcription remains poorly 
understood, and a function for its kinase activity has not been fully explored. 
Here we show that the catalytic activity of Cdc28 is important for basal 
transcription. Using a chemical-genetic screen for mutants that specifically 
require the kinase activity of Cdc28 for viability, we identified a plethora of 
basal transcription factors. In particular, CDC28 interacts genetically with 
genes encoding kinases that phosphorylate the C-terminal domain of RNA 
polymerase II, such as KIN28. ChIP followed by high-throughput sequencing 
(ChIP-seq) revealed that Cdc28 localizes to at least 200 genes, primarily with 
functions in cellular homeostasis, such as the plasma membrane proton pump PMA1. 
Transcription of PMA1 peaks early in the cell cycle, even though the promoter 
sequences of PMA1 (as well as the other Cdc28-enriched ORFs) lack cell-cycle 
elements, and PMA1 does not recruit Swi4/6-dependent cell-cycle box-binding 
factor/MluI cell-cycle box binding factor complexes. Finally, we found that 
recruitment of Cdc28 and Kin28 to PMA1 is mutually dependent and that the 
activity of both kinases is required for full phosphorylation of C-terminal 
domain-Ser5, for efficient transcription, and for mRNA capping. Our results 
reveal a mechanism of cell-cycle-dependent regulation of basal transcription.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1200067109
PMCID: PMC3387082
PMID: 22689984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

The cyclin-dependent kinase Cdc28 is the master regulator of the cell cycle in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Cdc28 initiates the cell cycle by activating cell-cycle–specific transcription factors that switch on a transcriptional program during late G1 phase. Cdc28 also has a cell-cycle–independent, direct function in regulating basal transcription, which does not require its catalytic activity. However, the exact role of Cdc28 in basal transcription remains poorly understood, and a function for its kinase activity has not been fully explored. Here we show that the catalytic activity of Cdc28 is important for basal transcription. Using a chemical-genetic screen for mutants that specifically require the kinase activity of Cdc28 for viability, we identified a plethora of basal transcription factors. In particular, CDC28 interacts genetically with genes encoding kinases that phosphorylate the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II, such as KIN28 . ChIP followed by high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq) revealed that Cdc28 localizes to at least 200 genes, primarily with functions in cellular homeostasis, such as the plasma membrane proton pump PMA1 . Transcription of PMA1 peaks early in the cell cycle, even though the promoter sequences of PMA1 (as well as the other Cdc28-enriched ORFs) lack cell-cycle elements, and PMA1 does not recruit Swi4/6-dependent cell-cycle box-binding factor/MluI cell-cycle box binding factor complexes. Finally, we found that recruitment of Cdc28 and Kin28 to PMA1 is mutually dependent and that the activity of both kinases is required for full phosphorylation of C-terminal domain–Ser5, for efficient transcription, and for mRNA capping. Our results reveal a mechanism of cell-cycle–dependent regulation of basal transcription.

Discussion

In this study, we found that Cdc28 is enriched by at least log2 = 1.5-fold in ∼200 protein-encoding genes and that transcription of at least several of these genes depends on Cdc28 kinase activity. These findings extend previous studies reporting a kinase-independent role for Cdc28 in regulation of transcription ( 9 , 10 ). The genes enriched for Cdc28 primarily include housekeeping genes important for cell-wall integrity, energy supply, translation, and chromatin architecture ( Fig. 2 C and Dataset S2 ). We propose that upon cell-cycle entry, Cdc28 directly stimulates transcription of these genes to maintain their protein levels as the bud grows and total cell volume increases.

The function of Cdc28 in basal transcription at least partially overlaps with that of Kin28, because the activity of both kinases is required for efficient phosphorylation of CTD-S5 and mRNA capping. We currently do not know how Cdc28 is recruited to ORFs. Recruitment of Kin28 and the Cks1-Cdc28 holoenzyme was mutually dependent, and recruitment of Cdc28 depended on its own activity, raising the possibility that Cdc28 promotes its own recruitment through a positive feedback loop. It is plausible that Cdc28 promotes CTD-S5 phosphorylation by recruiting RNAPII ( Fig. 3 C ) as well as Kin28 ( Fig. S3 H ), which subsequently phosphorylates CTD-S5. However, we cannot exclude the possibility that Cdc28 directly phosphorylates CTD-S5; indeed, hCDC2 phosphorylates the CTD in vivo, and it can phosphorylate CTD-S2 and CTD-S5 in vitro ( 29 , 30 ), although the consequence has remained unclear.

In conclusion, Cdc28 promotes recruitment of RNAPII and Kin28, which promotes phosphorylation of RNAPII on CTD-S5, to regulate directly the expression of a subset of genes during the early cell cycle (see Fig. 5 F for a model).
