---
pmid: '16107883'
title: G1 checkpoint failure and increased tumor susceptibility in mice lacking the
  novel p53 target Ptprv.
authors:
- Doumont G
- Martoriati A
- Beekman C
- Bogaerts S
- Mee PJ
- Bureau F
- Colombo E
- Alcalay M
- Bellefroid E
- Marchesi F
- Scanziani E
- Pelicci PG
- Marine JC
journal: EMBO J
year: '2005'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1201350
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600769
---

# G1 checkpoint failure and increased tumor susceptibility in mice lacking the novel p53 target Ptprv.
**Authors:** Doumont G, Martoriati A, Beekman C, Bogaerts S, Mee PJ, Bureau F, Colombo E, Alcalay M, Bellefroid E, Marchesi F, Scanziani E, Pelicci PG, Marine JC
**Journal:** EMBO J (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7600769](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7600769)
**PMC:** [PMC1201350](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1201350/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2005 Sep 7;24(17):3093-103. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600769. Epub 2005
Aug  18.

G1 checkpoint failure and increased tumor susceptibility in mice lacking the 
novel p53 target Ptprv.

Doumont G(1), Martoriati A, Beekman C, Bogaerts S, Mee PJ, Bureau F, Colombo E, 
Alcalay M, Bellefroid E, Marchesi F, Scanziani E, Pelicci PG, Marine JC.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Cancer Biology, Flanders Interuniversity Institute 
for Biotechnology (VIB), University of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium.

In response to DNA damage, p53 activates a G1 cell cycle checkpoint, in part 
through induction of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21(Waf1/Cip1). Here 
we report the identification of a new direct p53 target, Ptprv (or ESP), 
encoding a transmembrane tyrosine phosphatase. Ptprv transcription is 
dramatically and preferentially increased in cultured cells undergoing 
p53-dependent cell cycle arrest, but not in cells undergoing p53-mediated 
apoptosis. This observation was further confirmed in vivo using a Ptprv 
null-reporter mouse line. A p53-responsive element is present in the Ptprv 
promoter and p53 is recruited to this site in vivo. Importantly, while 
p53-dependent apoptosis is intact in mice lacking Ptprv, Ptprv-null fibroblasts 
and epithelial cells of the small intestine are defective in G1 checkpoint 
control. Thus, Ptprv is a new direct p53 target and a key mediator of 
p53-induced cell cycle arrest. Finally, Ptprv loss enhances the formation of 
epidermal papillomas after exposure to chemical carcinogens, suggesting that 
Ptprv acts to suppress tumor formation in vivo.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600769
PMCID: PMC1201350
PMID: 16107883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In response to DNA damage, p53 activates a G1 cell cycle checkpoint, in part through induction of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21(Waf1/Cip1). Here we report the identification of a new direct p53 target, Ptprv (or ESP ), encoding a transmembrane tyrosine phosphatase. Ptprv transcription is dramatically and preferentially increased in cultured cells undergoing p53-dependent cell cycle arrest, but not in cells undergoing p53-mediated apoptosis. This observation was further confirmed in vivo using a Ptprv null-reporter mouse line. A p53-responsive element is present in the Ptprv promoter and p53 is recruited to this site in vivo . Importantly, while p53-dependent apoptosis is intact in mice lacking Ptprv, Ptprv -null fibroblasts and epithelial cells of the small intestine are defective in G1 checkpoint control. Thus, Ptprv is a new direct p53 target and a key mediator of p53-induced cell cycle arrest. Finally, Ptprv loss enhances the formation of epidermal papillomas after exposure to chemical carcinogens, suggesting that Ptprv acts to suppress tumor formation in vivo .

Introduction

In response to a variety of stressors, the p53 tumor suppressor functions mainly as a sequence-specific DNA-binding transcription factor to promote antiproliferative responses, including cell cycle checkpoints, cellular senescence, and apoptosis ( Lane, 1992 ). A number of proapoptotic genes, encoding for the mitochondrial proteins Bax, Noxa, Puma, Apaf-1, or proteins that play a role in death receptor-mediated apoptosis, such as Fas, KILLER/DR5, and PIDD, are direct p53 targets ( El-Deiry, 1998 ). Notably, critical importance in vivo has only been established for few of these genes, including puma and noxA ( Jeffers et al , 2003 ; Villunger et al , 2003 ). p53-mediated cell cycle exit is partly mediated through induction of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 ( El-Deiry et al , 1993 ). p21-null fibroblasts are defective in p53-mediated G1 arrest in response to DNA damage or nucleotide depletion ( Brugarolas et al , 1995 ; Deng et al , 1995 ). However, this defect is only partial and, in contrast to p53-null cells, fibroblasts derived from p21-null mice enter senescence and have a lifespan similar to wild-type (WT) cells ( Pantoja and Serrano, 1999 ). In addition, these cells respond to oncogenic Ras by accumulating p53, and by decreasing their proliferation rate ( Pantoja and Serrano, 1999 ), suggesting that p21 is not the only critical mediator of G1 arrest.

Phosphorylation of tyrosine residues is a central feature of many cellular signalling pathways, including those affecting apoptosis, growth, differentiation, and cell cycle regulation ( Neel and Tonks, 1997 ). This phosphorylation is antagonistically controlled by protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) and phosphatases (PTPs). In an intriguing symmetry to receptor tyrosine kinases, many PTPs display a transmembrane topology. In all, 21 genes in the mouse and human genomes encode for members of the receptor PTP family ( Alonso et al , 2004 ). Identifying physiologically relevant ligands or substrates for these RPTPs has proven difficult.

Although a variety of PTKs has been directly linked to tumorigenesis through somatic activating mutations, only a few PTP genes have been implicated in cancer. Recent mutational analysis of the tyrosine phosphatome in colorectal cancers identified multiple inactivating somatic mutations in several PTPs, including three RPTPs. Expression of one of them, PTPRT, in human cancer cells inhibited cell proliferation ( Wang et al , 2004 ). Genetic inactivation of the DEP-1 induces a vascular phenotype characterized by enlarged, oversized vessels with abnormally high endothelial cell proliferation ( Takahashi et al , 2003 ). DEP-1 overexpression in mammary carcinoma cell lines and in thyroid carcinoma cells suppresses the transformed phenotype ( Keane et al , 1996 ; Trapasso et al , 2000 ). The frequent deletion of the gene in human cancers is another indication that DEP-1 acts as a tumor suppressor ( Ruivenkamp et al , 2002 ).

Here, we report the identification of a new p53 transcription target coding for Ptprv (also known as ESP ( Lee et al , 1996 )), a protein that is structurally highly related to DEP-1. Both proteins are composed of an extracellular domain containing exclusively multiple type III fibronectin repeats, a transmembrane segment, and either a single or two intracellular classical PTP domains for DEP-1 and Ptprv, respectively. The physiological role of Ptprv and its relevance to tumorigenesis is currently unknown. We show that, under specific conditions, p53 directly regulates transcription of Ptprv , and that Ptprv is a key mediator of p53-mediated cell cycle arrest following DNA damage. In addition, we provide evidences suggesting that Ptprv plays a role in tumor suppression.

Discussion

Our data indicate that Ptprv is a transcriptional target of p53. Ptprv is induced in a p53-dependent manner following DNA damage, culture shock, ARF-dependent stabilization of p53, and expression of oncogenic Ras. Consistent with these findings, an oligonucleotide microarray-based, gene expression profile analysis had previously identified Ptprv as a putative p53-inducible gene ( Kannan et al , 2001 ). We show here that induction of Ptprv expression is dramatic in cells undergoing p53-mediated cell cycle arrest, and thus in all in vitro and in vivo settings tested (see Figures 1A and 2C for examples). In these conditions, Ptprv induction was consistently more pronounced than that of p21, which is widely used as a marker of p53 activation. This is most likely due to a very low constitutive basal expression level in most tissues ( Dacquin et al , 2004 ). We therefore propose the use of Ptprv as a sensitive marker of p53 activation, and the Ptprv-nLacZ mouse model as a new valuable tool for monitoring p53 transcriptional activity in vivo .

Notably, Ptprv is only poorly induced in response to apoptotic stimuli or when cells are sensitized to death by oncogenes, such as E1A. The molecular basis for the selective induction of the Ptprv promoter by p53 is currently unknown, but this observation makes this promoter unique and therefore worth studying further.

Consistent with its preferential induction by p53, Ptprv is dispensable for p53-mediated apoptosis but necessary for efficient p53-dependent cell cycle arrest in response to DNA damage. A role of p21 in the p53-dependent G1 checkpoint had already been clearly established ( Brugarolas et al , 1995 ; Deng et al , 1995 ). The similarities between the biological consequences of p21 loss and Ptprv deficiency are remarkable. The growth properties of p21 −/− and Ptprv −/− cultured MEFs are virtually identical. These cells grow faster and to higher saturation densities than control cells. They are both compromised, to similar extents, in their G1 cell cycle checkpoint following γ-IR. However, they both still enter replicative senescence, even if they do so, with a slight delay as compared to WT cells, and decrease their proliferation in response to overexpression of oncogenic Ras ( Pantoja and Serrano, 1999 ). In addition, Ptprv - and p21 -deficient mice display an increased predisposition to tumour formation after exposure to chemical carcinogens ( Weinberg et al , 1999 ). Loss of both genes indeed enhanced the formation of benign epidermal papillomas after exposure to DMBA and, thus, even if slightly different protocols were used. While a classical DMBA/TPA two-step protocol was used for the p21-null mice, we did not expose the Ptprv-null mice to TPA. Notably, none of these mutants recapitulate the increased rate of malignant conversion of papillomas to carcinomas observed in the absence of p53 function ( Kemp et al , 1993 ). It therefore appears that both p21 and Ptprv act as mediators of p53-induced cell cycle arrest in response to DNA damage or activated Ras. However, loss of either Ptprv or p21 does not recapitulate the phenotypes observed in cells and mice lacking p53. Our data raise the possibility that Ptprv and p21 activate nonoverlapping pathways, contributing to a full p53-dependent response. It would therefore be of interest to investigate the DNA-damage response in cells in which both Ptprv and p21 are inactivated, the ability of these cells to proliferate following Ras expression, and the incidence and malignant conversion of epidermal papillomas in Ptprv/p21 double knockout mice after carcinogens exposure.

The molecular mechanism through which increased Ptprv expression triggers a cell proliferation block remains to be elucidated. Recent experiments have shown that RPTPs can bind to themselves (homophilic) as well as to other proteins (heterophilic). Interestingly, several RPTPs, including RPTPμ, DEP-1, RPTPκ, and RPTPλ, interact with and regulate the tyrosine phosphorylation level of catenins ( Fuchs et al , 1996 ; Cheng et al , 1997 ; Zondag et al , 2000 ; Holsinger et al , 2002 ), which are critical in physiological and pathological events such as cell proliferation, migration, and adhesion. DEP-1 colocalizes with the junctional protein VE-cadherin at cell borders in endothelial cells. Interestingly, members of the cadherin family of cell–cell adhesion molecules function in the suppression of cell growth and tumor invasion. Junctional components such catenins, however, can promote cell growth by inducing the transcription of genes involved in proliferation and cancer progression (reviewed in Ben-Ze'ev et al , 2000 ). The growth-inhibitory effects of the cadherin complex may involve binding and sequestration of the signaling pool of the catenins. Furthermore, inducible DEP-1 expression in fibroblasts antagonizes platelet-derived growth factor-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of a number of cellular proteins, including the PDGF receptor itself, components of the MAPK pathway (Erk1/2, p21Ras), Src, and activation of the receptor-associated phosphoinositide-3 kinase ( Kellie et al , 2003 ). Thus, the implication of Ptprv in the regulation of the cadherin-catenin and MAPK pathways should therefore be investigated.

Several lines of evidence, albeit preliminary, support the role of RPTPs in tumor suppression (see introduction). The data presented herein provide yet another link between RPTPs and cancer. The identification of Ptprv as a key downstream p53 target suggests that it might be required for tumor suppression by p53. In agreement, we show here that, even if Ptprv -null animals did not develop tumors spontaneously at an appreciable frequency in their first year of life, these mice show a significant acceleration of skin tumour formation compared to WT littermates when treated with carcinogens (DMBA). Since, this treatment induces H ras mutations at high frequency ( Quintanilla et al , 1986 ), it is tempting to speculate that mutated Ras can cooperate with Ptprv loss to accelerate tumor formation in vivo . Intriguingly, most of the lethal tumors found in DMBA-treated Ptrpv -null mice were aggressive lymphomas that infiltrated thymus, lymph nodes, and vital organs such as liver and lungs. In contrast, DMBA-treated ARF-null or p53-null animals primarily develop invasive skin carcinomas ( Kemp et al , 1993 ). Notably, mice deficient for DMP1, an ARF transcriptional activator, develop tumors with a spectrum very similar to the one observed in mice lacking Ptprv when treated with DMBA ( Inoue et al , 2000 ). DMP1 was originally isolated from a T-lymphocyte cDNA library and DMP1-null T-cells in long-term culture have a proliferative advantage when stimulated by IL-2 and antibody to CD3. By analogy, it will be interesting to assess the relevance of Ptprv for the development and function of cells of lymphoid origin.
