---
pmid: '27490777'
title: Structural and Dynamic Characterization of the Molecular Hub Early Region 1A
  (E1A) from Human Adenovirus.
authors:
- Hošek T
- Calçada EO
- Nogueira MO
- Salvi M
- Pagani TD
- Felli IC
- Pierattelli R
journal: Chemistry
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/chem.201602510
---

# Structural and Dynamic Characterization of the Molecular Hub Early Region 1A (E1A) from Human Adenovirus.
**Authors:** Hošek T, Calçada EO, Nogueira MO, Salvi M, Pagani TD, Felli IC, Pierattelli R
**Journal:** Chemistry (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/chem.201602510](https://doi.org/10.1002/chem.201602510)

## Abstract

1. Chemistry. 2016 Sep 5;22(37):13010-3. doi: 10.1002/chem.201602510. Epub 2016
Aug  4.

Structural and Dynamic Characterization of the Molecular Hub Early Region 1A 
(E1A) from Human Adenovirus.

Hošek T(1), Calçada EO(1), Nogueira MO(1), Salvi M(1), Pagani TD(1), Felli 
IC(2), Pierattelli R(3).

Author information:
(1)CERM and Department of Chemistry "Ugo Schiff", University of Florence, via 
Luigi Sacconi 6, 50019, Sesto Fiorentino, Italy.
(2)CERM and Department of Chemistry "Ugo Schiff", University of Florence, via 
Luigi Sacconi 6, 50019, Sesto Fiorentino, Italy. felli@cerm.unifi.it.
(3)CERM and Department of Chemistry "Ugo Schiff", University of Florence, via 
Luigi Sacconi 6, 50019, Sesto Fiorentino, Italy. pierattelli@cerm.unifi.it.

The small-DNA human adenovirus encodes one of the most versatile molecular hubs, 
the E1A protein. This protein is essential for productive viral infection in 
human cells and a vast amount of biologically relevant data are available on its 
interactions with host proteins. Up to now, however, no high-resolution 
structural and dynamic information on E1A is available despite its important 
biological role. Among the different spliced variants of E1A, two are expressed 
at high level in the early stage of infection. These are 243 and 289 residues 
isoforms. Herein, we present their NMR characterization, showing that they are 
both highly disordered, but also demonstrate a certain heterogeneous behavior in 
terms of structural and dynamic properties. Furthermore, we present the 
characterization of the isolated domain of the longer variant, known as CR3. 
This study opens the way to understanding at the molecular level how E1A 
functions.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/chem.201602510
PMID: 27490777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
