---
pmid: '17596301'
title: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus ORF6 antagonizes STAT1 function
  by sequestering nuclear import factors on the rough endoplasmic reticulum/Golgi
  membrane.
authors:
- Frieman M
- Yount B
- Heise M
- Kopecky-Bromberg SA
- Palese P
- Baric RS
journal: J Virol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2045396
doi: 10.1128/JVI.01012-07
---

# Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus ORF6 antagonizes STAT1 function by sequestering nuclear import factors on the rough endoplasmic reticulum/Golgi membrane.
**Authors:** Frieman M, Yount B, Heise M, Kopecky-Bromberg SA, Palese P, Baric RS
**Journal:** J Virol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.01012-07](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01012-07)
**PMC:** [PMC2045396](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2045396/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2007 Sep;81(18):9812-24. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01012-07. Epub 2007 Jun 27.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus ORF6 antagonizes STAT1 function by 
sequestering nuclear import factors on the rough endoplasmic reticulum/Golgi 
membrane.

Frieman M(1), Yount B, Heise M, Kopecky-Bromberg SA, Palese P, Baric RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, 3304 Hooker Research Center, Chapel Hill, NC 
27599-7435, USA.

The host innate immune response is an important deterrent of severe viral 
infection in humans and animals. Nuclear import factors function as key 
gatekeepers that regulate the transport of innate immune regulatory cargo to the 
nucleus of cells to activate the antiviral response. Using severe acute 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) as a model, we demonstrate that 
SARS-COV ORF6 protein is localized to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)/Golgi 
membrane in infected cells, where it binds to and disrupts nuclear import 
complex formation by tethering karyopherin alpha 2 and karyopherin beta 1 to the 
membrane. Retention of import factors at the ER/Golgi membrane leads to a loss 
of STAT1 transport into the nucleus in response to interferon signaling, thus 
blocking the expression of STAT1-activated genes that establish an antiviral 
state. We mapped the region of ORF6, which binds karyopherin alpha 2, to the C 
terminus of ORF6 and show that mutations in the C terminus no longer bind 
karyopherin alpha 2 or block the nuclear import of STAT1. We also show that 
N-terminal deletions of karyopherin alpha 2 that no longer bind to karyopherin 
beta 1 still retain ORF6 binding activity but no longer block STAT1 nuclear 
import. Recombinant SARS-CoV lacking ORF6 did not tether karyopherin alpha 2 to 
the ER/Golgi membrane and allowed the import of the STAT1 complex into the 
nucleus. We discuss the likely implications of these data on SARS-CoV 
replication and pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01012-07
PMCID: PMC2045396
PMID: 17596301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The host innate immune response is an important deterrent of severe viral infection in humans and animals. Nuclear import factors function as key gatekeepers that regulate the transport of innate immune regulatory cargo to the nucleus of cells to activate the antiviral response. Using severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) as a model, we demonstrate that SARS-COV ORF6 protein is localized to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)/Golgi membrane in infected cells, where it binds to and disrupts nuclear import complex formation by tethering karyopherin alpha 2 and karyopherin beta 1 to the membrane. Retention of import factors at the ER/Golgi membrane leads to a loss of STAT1 transport into the nucleus in response to interferon signaling, thus blocking the expression of STAT1-activated genes that establish an antiviral state. We mapped the region of ORF6, which binds karyopherin alpha 2, to the C terminus of ORF6 and show that mutations in the C terminus no longer bind karyopherin alpha 2 or block the nuclear import of STAT1. We also show that N-terminal deletions of karyopherin alpha 2 that no longer bind to karyopherin beta 1 still retain ORF6 binding activity but no longer block STAT1 nuclear import. Recombinant SARS-CoV lacking ORF6 did not tether karyopherin alpha 2 to the ER/Golgi membrane and allowed the import of the STAT1 complex into the nucleus. We discuss the likely implications of these data on SARS-CoV replication and pathogenesis.

DISCUSSION

Viruses have evolved diverse mechanisms to evade host innate and adaptive immunity ( 1 , 2 , 4 , 6 , 16 , 19 , 20 , 30 - 32 , 37 , 41 , 49 ). SARS-CoV infection does not induce type I IFN in most cells in culture and likely encodes several proteins that disrupt IFN production. In support of data from previous work ( 25 ), we show that SARS-CoV encoding a functional ORF6 protein was able to block STAT1-mediated signaling, while deletion mutants lacking ORF6 could not block STAT1 translocation into the nucleus after IFN treatment. SARS infection also retains KPNA2 at the ER/Golgi membrane; however, in SARSΔORF6-infected cells, KPNA2 resides in the nucleus. ORF6 also retained KPNB1 at the ER/Golgi membrane in complex with KPNA2. Deletion of the N terminus of KPNA2, which binds KPNB1, no longer retained KPNB1 at the ER/Golgi membrane in the presence of ORF6 and did not antagonize STAT1 nuclear import in response to IFN-β.

Under normal conditions, the NLS:KPNA2 interaction reveals an importin beta binding motif at the N terminus of KPNA2 which binds KPNB1. This complex is then imported into the nucleus, where Ran-GTP induces the release of KPNA2 and KPNB1 from the cargo, and it is recycled back out into the cytoplasm and able to bind to new cargo. Our working model is that the cytoplasmic tail of ORF6, acting as a mock NLS, functions to bind and retain KPNA2 on the ER/Golgi membrane (Fig. 9 ). Since membrane-bound ORF6 is unable to be imported into the nucleus, KPNA2 is retained in a bound state with a functionally exposed importin beta binding domain at its N terminus. Although the importin beta binding domain recruits and binds KPNB1, the complex cannot localize to the nucleus and remains tethered in a bound state. Since the levels of Ran-GTP are very low in the cytoplasm, KPNB1 and KPNA2 cannot release the bound ORF6 cargo and are functionally retained at the ER/Golgi membrane.
