---
pmid: '22044588'
title: p53-TIGAR axis attenuates mitophagy to exacerbate cardiac damage after ischemia.
authors:
- Hoshino A
- Matoba S
- Iwai-Kanai E
- Nakamura H
- Kimata M
- Nakaoka M
- Katamura M
- Okawa Y
- Ariyoshi M
- Mita Y
- Ikeda K
- Ueyama T
- Okigaki M
- Matsubara H
journal: J Mol Cell Cardiol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2011.10.008
---

# p53-TIGAR axis attenuates mitophagy to exacerbate cardiac damage after ischemia.
**Authors:** Hoshino A, Matoba S, Iwai-Kanai E, Nakamura H, Kimata M, Nakaoka M, Katamura M, Okawa Y, Ariyoshi M, Mita Y, Ikeda K, Ueyama T, Okigaki M, Matsubara H
**Journal:** J Mol Cell Cardiol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yjmcc.2011.10.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yjmcc.2011.10.008)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2012 Jan;52(1):175-84. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2011.10.008. 
Epub 2011 Oct 18.

p53-TIGAR axis attenuates mitophagy to exacerbate cardiac damage after ischemia.

Hoshino A(1), Matoba S, Iwai-Kanai E, Nakamura H, Kimata M, Nakaoka M, Katamura 
M, Okawa Y, Ariyoshi M, Mita Y, Ikeda K, Ueyama T, Okigaki M, Matsubara H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University School of 
Medicine, Kawaramachi-Hirokoji, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.

Inhibition of tumor suppressor p53 is cardioprotective against ischemic injury 
and provides resistance to subsequent cardiac remodeling. We investigated 
p53-mediated expansion of ischemic damage with a focus on mitochondrial 
integrity in association with autophagy and apoptosis. p53(-/-) heart showed 
that autophagic flux was promoted under ischemia without a change in cardiac 
tissue ATP content. Electron micrographs revealed that ischemic border zone in 
p53(-/-) mice had 5-fold greater numbers of autophagic vacuoles containing 
mitochondria, indicating the occurrence of mitophagy, with an apparent reduction 
of abnormal mitochondria compared with those in WT mice. Analysis of autophagic 
mediators acting downstream of p53 revealed that TIGAR (TP53-induced glycolysis 
and apoptosis regulator) was exclusively up-regulated in ischemic myocardium. 
TIGAR(-/-) mice exhibited the promotion of mitophagy followed by decrease of 
abnormal mitochondria and resistance to ischemic injury, consistent with the 
phenotype of p53(-/-) mice. In p53(-/-) and TIGAR(-/-) ischemic myocardium, ROS 
production was elevated and followed by Bnip3 activation which is an initiator 
of mitophagy. Furthermore, the activation of Bnip3 and mitophagy due to 
p53/TIGAR inhibition were reversed with antioxidant N-acetyl-cysteine, 
indicating that this adaptive response requires ROS signal. Inhibition of 
mitophagy using chloroquine in p53(-/-) or TIGAR(-/-) mice exacerbated 
accumulation of damaged mitochondria to the level of wild-type mice and 
attenuated cardioprotective action. These findings indicate that 
p53/TIGAR-mediated inhibition of myocyte mitophagy is responsible for impairment 
of mitochondrial integrity and subsequent apoptosis, the process of which is 
closely involved in p53-mediated ventricular remodeling after myocardial 
infarction.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2011.10.008
PMID: 22044588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
