---
pmid: '18439860'
title: The unprocessed preprotein form IATC103S of the isopenicillin N acyltransferase
  is transported inside peroxisomes and regulates its self-processing.
authors:
- García-Estrada C
- Vaca I
- Fierro F
- Sjollema K
- Veenhuis M
- Martín JF
journal: Fungal Genet Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.fgb.2008.03.005
---

# The unprocessed preprotein form IATC103S of the isopenicillin N acyltransferase is transported inside peroxisomes and regulates its self-processing.
**Authors:** García-Estrada C, Vaca I, Fierro F, Sjollema K, Veenhuis M, Martín JF
**Journal:** Fungal Genet Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.fgb.2008.03.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fgb.2008.03.005)

## Abstract

1. Fungal Genet Biol. 2008 Jun;45(6):1043-52. doi: 10.1016/j.fgb.2008.03.005.
Epub  2008 Apr 1.

The unprocessed preprotein form IATC103S of the isopenicillin N acyltransferase 
is transported inside peroxisomes and regulates its self-processing.

García-Estrada C(1), Vaca I, Fierro F, Sjollema K, Veenhuis M, Martín JF.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biotecnología (INBIOTEC), Parque Científico de León, Av. Real, 
1, 24006 León, Spain.

Previous studies in Penicillium chrysogenum and Aspergillus nidulans suggested 
that self-processing of the isopenicillin N acyltransferase (IAT) is an 
important differential factor in these fungi. Expression of a mutant 
penDE(C103S) gene in P. chrysogenum gave rise to an unprocessed inactive variant 
of IAT (IAT(C103S)) located inside peroxisomes, which indicates that transport 
of the proIAT inside these organelles is not dependent on the processing state 
of the protein. Co-expression of the penDE(C103S) and wild-type penDE genes in 
P. chrysogenum (Wis54-DE(C103S) strain) led to a decrease in benzylpenicillin 
levels. Changes in the wild-type IAT processing profile (beta subunit formation) 
were observed in the Wis54-DE(C103S) strain, suggesting a regulatory role of the 
unprocessed IAT(C103S) in the processing of the wild-type IAT. This was 
confirmed in Escherichia coli, where a delay in the processing of IAT in 
presence of the unprocessable IAT(C103S) was observed. Our results indicate that 
IAT is post-translationally regulated by its preprotein, which interferes with 
the self-processing.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fgb.2008.03.005
PMID: 18439860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
