---
pmid: '11805826'
title: Functional organization of the yeast proteome by systematic analysis of protein
  complexes.
authors:
- Gavin AC
- Bösche M
- Krause R
- Grandi P
- Marzioch M
- Bauer A
- Schultz J
- Rick JM
- Michon AM
- Cruciat CM
- Remor M
- Höfert C
- Schelder M
- Brajenovic M
- Ruffner H
- Merino A
- Klein K
- Hudak M
- Dickson D
- Rudi T
- Gnau V
- Bauch A
- Bastuck S
- Huhse B
- Leutwein C
- Heurtier MA
- Copley RR
- Edelmann A
- Querfurth E
- Rybin V
- Drewes G
- Raida M
- Bouwmeester T
- Bork P
- Seraphin B
- Kuster B
- Neubauer G
- Superti-Furga G
journal: Nature
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/415141a
---

# Functional organization of the yeast proteome by systematic analysis of protein complexes.
**Authors:** Gavin AC, Bösche M, Krause R, Grandi P, Marzioch M, Bauer A, Schultz J, Rick JM, Michon AM, Cruciat CM, Remor M, Höfert C, Schelder M, Brajenovic M, Ruffner H, Merino A, Klein K, Hudak M, Dickson D, Rudi T, Gnau V, Bauch A, Bastuck S, Huhse B, Leutwein C, Heurtier MA, Copley RR, Edelmann A, Querfurth E, Rybin V, Drewes G, Raida M, Bouwmeester T, Bork P, Seraphin B, Kuster B, Neubauer G, Superti-Furga G
**Journal:** Nature (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/415141a](https://doi.org/10.1038/415141a)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2002 Jan 10;415(6868):141-7. doi: 10.1038/415141a.

Functional organization of the yeast proteome by systematic analysis of protein 
complexes.

Gavin AC(1), Bösche M, Krause R, Grandi P, Marzioch M, Bauer A, Schultz J, Rick 
JM, Michon AM, Cruciat CM, Remor M, Höfert C, Schelder M, Brajenovic M, Ruffner 
H, Merino A, Klein K, Hudak M, Dickson D, Rudi T, Gnau V, Bauch A, Bastuck S, 
Huhse B, Leutwein C, Heurtier MA, Copley RR, Edelmann A, Querfurth E, Rybin V, 
Drewes G, Raida M, Bouwmeester T, Bork P, Seraphin B, Kuster B, Neubauer G, 
Superti-Furga G.

Author information:
(1)Cellzome AG, Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany. 
anne-claude.gavin@cellzome.com

Comment in
    Nature. 2002 Jan 10;415(6868):123-4. doi: 10.1038/415123a.

Most cellular processes are carried out by multiprotein complexes. The 
identification and analysis of their components provides insight into how the 
ensemble of expressed proteins (proteome) is organized into functional units. We 
used tandem-affinity purification (TAP) and mass spectrometry in a large-scale 
approach to characterize multiprotein complexes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We 
processed 1,739 genes, including 1,143 human orthologues of relevance to human 
biology, and purified 589 protein assemblies. Bioinformatic analysis of these 
assemblies defined 232 distinct multiprotein complexes and proposed new cellular 
roles for 344 proteins, including 231 proteins with no previous functional 
annotation. Comparison of yeast and human complexes showed that conservation 
across species extends from single proteins to their molecular environment. Our 
analysis provides an outline of the eukaryotic proteome as a network of protein 
complexes at a level of organization beyond binary interactions. This 
higher-order map contains fundamental biological information and offers the 
context for a more reasoned and informed approach to drug discovery.

DOI: 10.1038/415141a
PMID: 11805826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
