---
pmid: '15710329'
title: Human MUC1 oncoprotein regulates p53-responsive gene transcription in the genotoxic
  stress response.
authors:
- Wei X
- Xu H
- Kufe D
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2005.01.008
---

# Human MUC1 oncoprotein regulates p53-responsive gene transcription in the genotoxic stress response.
**Authors:** Wei X, Xu H, Kufe D
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2005.01.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2005.01.008)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2005 Feb;7(2):167-78. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2005.01.008.

Human MUC1 oncoprotein regulates p53-responsive gene transcription in the 
genotoxic stress response.

Wei X(1), Xu H, Kufe D.

Author information:
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115, USA.

The MUC1 oncoprotein is aberrantly overexpressed by most human carcinomas. The 
present work demonstrates that MUC1 associates with the p53 tumor suppressor, 
and that this interaction is increased by genotoxic stress. The MUC1 cytoplasmic 
domain binds directly to p53 regulatory domain. Chromatin immunoprecipitation 
assays demonstrate that MUC1 coprecipitates with p53 on the p53-responsive 
elements of the p21 gene promoter and coactivates p21 gene transcription. 
Conversely, MUC1 attenuates activation of Bax transcription. In concert with 
these results, MUC1 promotes selection of the p53-dependent growth arrest 
response and suppresses the p53-dependent apoptotic response to DNA damage. 
These findings indicate that MUC1 regulates p53-responsive genes and thereby 
cell fate in the genotoxic stress response.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2005.01.008
PMID: 15710329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
