---
pmid: '19123269'
title: Empirically controlled mapping of the Caenorhabditis elegans protein-protein
  interactome network.
authors:
- Simonis N
- Rual JF
- Carvunis AR
- Tasan M
- Lemmens I
- Hirozane-Kishikawa T
- Hao T
- Sahalie JM
- Venkatesan K
- Gebreab F
- Cevik S
- Klitgord N
- Fan C
- Braun P
- Li N
- Ayivi-Guedehoussou N
- Dann E
- Bertin N
- Szeto D
- Dricot A
- Yildirim MA
- Lin C
- de Smet AS
- Kao HL
- Simon C
- Smolyar A
- Ahn JS
- Tewari M
- Boxem M
- Milstein S
- Yu H
- Dreze M
- Vandenhaute J
- Gunsalus KC
- Cusick ME
- Hill DE
- Tavernier J
- Roth FP
- Vidal M
journal: Nat Methods
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3057923
doi: 10.1038/nmeth.1279
---

# Empirically controlled mapping of the Caenorhabditis elegans protein-protein interactome network.
**Authors:** Simonis N, Rual JF, Carvunis AR, Tasan M, Lemmens I, Hirozane-Kishikawa T, Hao T, Sahalie JM, Venkatesan K, Gebreab F, Cevik S, Klitgord N, Fan C, Braun P, Li N, Ayivi-Guedehoussou N, Dann E, Bertin N, Szeto D, Dricot A, Yildirim MA, Lin C, de Smet AS, Kao HL, Simon C, Smolyar A, Ahn JS, Tewari M, Boxem M, Milstein S, Yu H, Dreze M, Vandenhaute J, Gunsalus KC, Cusick ME, Hill DE, Tavernier J, Roth FP, Vidal M
**Journal:** Nat Methods (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nmeth.1279](https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1279)
**PMC:** [PMC3057923](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3057923/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Methods. 2009 Jan;6(1):47-54. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.1279.

Empirically controlled mapping of the Caenorhabditis elegans protein-protein 
interactome network.

Simonis N(1), Rual JF, Carvunis AR, Tasan M, Lemmens I, Hirozane-Kishikawa T, 
Hao T, Sahalie JM, Venkatesan K, Gebreab F, Cevik S, Klitgord N, Fan C, Braun P, 
Li N, Ayivi-Guedehoussou N, Dann E, Bertin N, Szeto D, Dricot A, Yildirim MA, 
Lin C, de Smet AS, Kao HL, Simon C, Smolyar A, Ahn JS, Tewari M, Boxem M, 
Milstein S, Yu H, Dreze M, Vandenhaute J, Gunsalus KC, Cusick ME, Hill DE, 
Tavernier J, Roth FP, Vidal M.

Author information:
(1)Center for Cancer Systems Biology and Department of Cancer Biology, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

To provide accurate biological hypotheses and elucidate global properties of 
cellular networks, systematic identification of protein-protein interactions 
must meet high quality standards.We present an expanded C. elegans 
protein-protein interaction network, or 'interactome' map, derived from testing 
a matrix of approximately 10,000 x approximately 10,000 proteins using a highly 
specific, high-throughput yeast two-hybrid system. Through a new empirical 
quality control framework, we show that the resulting data set (Worm Interactome 
2007, or WI-2007) was similar in quality to low-throughput data curated from the 
literature. We filtered previous interaction data sets and integrated them with 
WI-2007 to generate a high-confidence consolidated map (Worm Interactome version 
8, or WI8). This work allowed us to estimate the size of the worm interactome at 
approximately 116,000 interactions. Comparison with other types of functional 
genomic data shows the complementarity of distinct experimental approaches in 
predicting different functional relationships between genes or proteins

DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.1279
PMCID: PMC3057923
PMID: 19123269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

To provide accurate biological hypotheses and inform upon global properties of cellular networks, systematic identification of protein–protein interactions has to meet high-quality standards. We present an expanded Caenorhabditis elegans protein-protein interaction network, or “interactome” map derived from testing a matrix of ~ 10,000 × ~ 10,000 proteins using a highly specific high-throughput yeast two-hybrid system. Through a new quality control empirical framework, We show that the resulting dataset (Worm Interactome 2007 or WI-2007) is similar in quality to low-throughput data curated from the literature. Previous interaction datasets have been filtered and integrated with WI-2007 to generate a high confidence consolidated map (Worm Interactome version 8 or WI8). This work allows us to estimate the size of the worm interactome at ~ 116,000 interactions. Comparison with other types of functional genomic data shows the complementarity of distinct experimental approaches in predicting different functional relationship features between genes or proteins.

DISCUSSION

We describe the implementation of a novel integrated strategy for generating high confidence networks based on a highly stringent HT-Y2H assay combined with a quality control framework 13 , thus achieving an important step along the path to completion of the C. elegans interactome. Our estimated size of the complete C. elegans biophysical interactome is approximately 116,000 interactions, considering only a single protein isoform per gene. While WI8 provides 3,816 interactions, lack of screening completeness as well as incomplete sampling and assay sensitivity are key explanations for why 96–97% of the interactome remains untouched. From the overlap of two independent HT-Y2H screens, we estimate that a single high-throughput screen can capture ~ 30% of the detectable interactions and thus would need to be repeated multiple times to reach saturation. Even at saturation some interactions may not be detectable by Y2H because of intrinsic limitations of the assay, e.g. , proteins may not be imported into the nucleus, proper folding may not occur because of the fusion with the DNA-binding or activation domains, interactions may require post-translational modifications or co-factors not present within S. cerevisiae . The proportion of interactions detectable with our HT-Y2H system is estimated at approximately 16%.

Several approaches under development, involving optimization of the experimental setup 27 or systematic ORF fragmentation 28 , should improve the assay sensitivity in future interactome mapping projects. However, achieving comprehensive mapping of the interactome will require use of multiple assays with complementary assay sensitivities. For example, experiments conducted in mammalian cells may uncover some interactions missed by Y2H, but fail to find others because some interactions do not occur under the conditions tested 27 . In addition to solving sensitivity issues, additional cloning efforts will have to be undertaken to increase the screening completeness of the search spaces of future interactome mapping projects. WI8 represents an early milestone towards uncovering the complete interactome network, yet it is the most comprehensive and reliable protein-protein interactions dataset available today for C. elegans .

Additional methods

Detailed descriptions of the MAPPIT scoring, WI-2007 characterization through Monte-Carlo simulation, overlap between component networks, module-scale sub-networks extraction, chronogram intersections and all datasets are available in Supplementary Methods online. WI8 is provided with MIMIX specifications as Supplementary Data 1 online. The integrated functional network is available as Supplementary Data 2 online.
