---
pmid: '25891078'
title: IRGM governs the core autophagy machinery to conduct antimicrobial defense.
authors:
- Chauhan S
- Mandell MA
- Deretic V
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4427528
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.03.020
---

# IRGM governs the core autophagy machinery to conduct antimicrobial defense.
**Authors:** Chauhan S, Mandell MA, Deretic V
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2015.03.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2015.03.020)
**PMC:** [PMC4427528](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4427528/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2015 May 7;58(3):507-21. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.03.020. Epub
2015  Apr 16.

IRGM governs the core autophagy machinery to conduct antimicrobial defense.

Chauhan S(1), Mandell MA(2), Deretic V(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of New Mexico 
Health Sciences Center, 915 Camino de Salud, NE, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA. 
Electronic address: schauhan1@salud.unm.edu.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of New Mexico 
Health Sciences Center, 915 Camino de Salud, NE, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of New Mexico 
Health Sciences Center, 915 Camino de Salud, NE, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA. 
Electronic address: vderetic@salud.unm.edu.

IRGM, encoded by a uniquely human gene conferring risk for inflammatory 
diseases, affects autophagy through an unknown mechanism. Here, we show how IRGM 
controls autophagy. IRGM interacts with ULK1 and Beclin 1 and promotes their 
co-assembly thus governing the formation of autophagy initiation complexes. We 
further show that IRGM interacts with pattern recognition receptors including 
NOD2. IRGM, NOD2, and ATG16L1, all of which are Crohn's disease risk factors, 
form a molecular complex to modulate autophagic responses to microbial products. 
NOD2 enhances K63-linked polyubiquitination of IRGM, which is required for 
interactions of IRGM with the core autophagy factors and for microbial 
clearance. Thus, IRGM plays a direct role in organizing the core autophagy 
machinery to endow it with antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory functions.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.03.020
PMCID: PMC4427528
PMID: 25891078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Autophagy is a cellular homeostatic mechanism with broad roles in human health and disease ( Mizushima et al., 2008 ). Autophagy is at the intersection of metabolic ( Mizushima et al., 2008 ) and anti-microbial processes ( Deretic et al., 2015 ; Levine et al., 2011 ). Thus, the system responds to a range of inputs such as starvation ( Mizushima et al., 2008 ), and endogenous danger associated molecular patterns and microbial products commonly referred to as pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPS) ( Deretic et al., 2015 ). Autophagic responses to PAMPS lead to direct antimicrobial action through a process termed xenophagy and control of inflammation and other immune processes ( Deretic et al., 2015 ; Levine et al., 2011 ).

Among the better-established links between autophagy and human diseases are the genetic polymorphisms in ATG16L1 and IRGM conferring risk for Crohn’s disease (CD), an intestinal inflammatory disorder ( Consortium, 2007 ; Craddock et al., 2010 ). The human population polymorphisms in IRGM have been linked to autophagy ( Consortium, 2007 ; Craddock et al., 2010 ) and to its effector outputs including direct antimicrobial defense ( Brest et al., 2011 ; McCarroll et al., 2008 ). In keeping with its autophagy-mediated antimicrobial role, IRGM is additionally a genetic risk factor for tuberculosis in different human populations ( Intemann et al., 2009 ; Song et al., 2014 ) and may afford protection in leprosy ( Yang et al., 2014 ). However, the molecular mechanism of IRGM’s function in autophagy has remained a mystery.

IRGM has no homologs among the Atg genes in yeast, which makes it difficult to assign to it an autophagy-specific function; instead, IRGM has been considered to affect autophagy indirectly ( Singh et al., 2006 ; Singh et al., 2010 ). A complicating factor in understanding the exact function of IRGM is that it is distinctly a human gene ( Bekpen et al., 2009 ). Its orthologs are present only in African great apes and Homo sapiens but active alleles are absent in ancestral evolutionary lineages leading up to them ( Bekpen et al., 2009 ). The mouse genome encodes a large family of immunity related GTPase (21 IRG genes) compared to a single gene ( IRGM ) in humans; furthermore, all murine IRGs encode ~40-kDa proteins that are much larger than the human IRGM (21 kDa). The prevailing view of the murine IRGs is that they have predominantly non-autophagy functions ( Choi et al., 2014 ). Thus the significant information gathered in the murine systems may have limited import on how the human IRGM works.

Given the significance of IRGM in human populations and the notoriously high prevalence of diseases such as CD and tuberculosis, it is surprising that IRGM’s mechanism of action in autophagy remains unknown. Here we report that IRGM physically interacts with key autophagy regulators, ULK1, Beclin 1, ATG14L and ATG16L1. We also show that IRGM links inputs from PAMP sensors by making molecular complexes with NOD2, another genetic risk factor in CD ( Hugot et al., 2001 ; Ogura et al., 2001 ). The formation of NOD2-IRGM complex is stimulated in response to PAMPs, whereas increased association of NOD2 with IRGM promotes IRGM-directed assembly of autophagy regulators.

DISCUSSION

In this study we have shown that human IRGM, hitherto believed to have indirect effects on autophagy, directly governs the assembly of the principal autophagy regulators. Furthermore, it physically links the microbial sensors, including NOD2, to the core autophagic apparatus. This solves the long-standing puzzle regarding how IRGM works, and places it mechanistically at the center of action in autophagic responses to microbes.

IRGM assembles ULK1 and Beclin 1 in their activated forms to promote autophagy. Of relevance for how these proteins become activated is that IRGM also stimulates AMPK by stabilizing it in its Thr-172 phosphorylated form, which is required for AMPK activation ( Mihaylova and Shaw, 2011 ). This is likely due to effects of IRGM on mitochondria ( Singh et al., 2010 ), which activates AMPK ( Romanello et al., 2010 ; Turkieh et al., 2014 ), and may involve specific kinases upstream of AMPK including TAK1 ( Criollo et al., 2011 ) and CAMKKβ ( Hoyer-Hansen et al., 2007 ) that have been shown to phosphorylate AMPK at Thr-172 ( Mihaylova and Shaw, 2011 ) and activate autophagy ( Criollo et al., 2011 ; Hoyer-Hansen et al., 2007 ). The stabilization of phospho-Thr-172 AMPK likely contributes to AMPK-dependent phosphorylation and activation of ULK1 ( Egan et al., 2011 ; Kim et al., 2011 ) and Beclin 1 ( Kim et al., 2013 ). Consistent with this, IRGM increases total activated ULK1 phosphorylated at Ser-317 and Ser-555 by AMPK ( Egan et al., 2011 ; Kim et al., 2011 ), and the activated form of Beclin 1 that is phosphorylated at Ser-15 by ULK1 ( Kim et al., 2013 ) and at Ser-93 and Ser-96 by AMPK ( Kim et al., 2013 ). IRGM has a second effect on autophagic regulators by assembling the activated ULK1 with Beclin 1. Thus, IRGM promotes phosphorylation cascade of key autophagy regulators and assembles them into autophagy initiation complexes ( Figure 7J ).

Of interest is that IRGM increases levels of a number of autophagy regulators (ULK1, ATG14L, AMBRA1, and ATGL1) but does not affect the stability of others (Beclin 1 and the ATG5-ATG12 complex). The apparent absence of effects on Beclin 1 stability may be explained by the bulk of Beclin 1 being predominantly in non-autophagy related hVPS34 complexes whereas ATG14L-associated Beclin 1 represents a minority of Beclin 1 species in the cell ( Kim et al., 2013 ). IRGM also has an effect on NOD2 levels. However, IRGM reduces NOD2 levels, in contrast to IRGM-dependent stabilization of autophagy regulators. We interpret this dichotomy as a part of the well tuned circuitry in response to microbial challenge: whereas autophagy is activated as an antimicrobial effector mechanism, the stimulatory inputs into the system mediated by NOD2 are downregulated lest the system overcommits, which in turn may result in detrimental consequences for the host. PAMP (e.g. MDP) tolerance is an important mechanism to avoid septic shock, which is in part achieved by NOD2 degradation ( Zurek et al., 2012 ).

It has been previously shown that ATG16L1 and NOD2 interact ( Cooney et al., 2010 ; Travassos et al., 2010 ). This has placed two of the Crohn’s disease-genetic risk factors together, but has left the role of IRGM unexplained. The data presented here show that IRGM is in complexes with ATG16L1 and NOD2 and that IRGM enhances assembly of Atg16L1 with NOD2. Moreover, IRGM affects the stability of each of the components of this complex. Although bringing ATG16L1 to the bacterial entry site marked by NOD2 is a previously known important step ( Travassos et al., 2010 ), how this links up with the core autophagy regulators including ULK1 and Beclin 1 has not been addressed in prior studies. In this work we show that IRGM plays that bridging role by stimulating phosphorylation and activation of key autophagy regulators and placing them together with ATG16L1 ( Figure 7J ). This point is not trivial, as for example it has not been easy to connect the two seemingly separate systems of autophagy initiation: ULK1-Beclin1 complexes vs. LC3-II conjugation and localized autophagosomal membrane build up. Only recently a part of this key issue has been solved for conventional (non-immunological) autophagy by showing that ATG16L1 and WIPI2 directly interact ( Dooley et al., 2014 ), with WIPI2 recognizing the lipid modification products of the Beclin 1-directed hVPS34 activity. We propose here that IRGM acts with a similar purpose by bridging ULK1-Beclin 1 complexes with the autophagy conjugation machinery, as shown here for ATG16L1. This can additionally explain why ATG5 is found in IRGM complexes ( Gregoire et al., 2011 ).

Ubiquitination has been implicated in autophagy in several ways primarily in targeting of substrates for autophagic elimination ( Stolz et al., 2014 ). However, the role of K63-linked polyubiquitination has also begun to be appreciated as a mechanism for stabilization of large autophagy-initiating complexes ( Nazio et al., 2013 ; Shi and Kehrl, 2010 ). Polyubiquitination of IRGM and its role in autophagy ( Figure 7J ) does not play a role in targeting substrates for autophagy; instead, it stabilizes multi-protein autophagy initiation complexes. The ubiquitination of IRGM is under the control by NOD2. NOD2 enhances association of ubiquitination-competent IRGM with ULK1 and Beclin 1, whereas NOD2 has no similar effect on the ubiquitination-null mutant of IRGM (IRGM-K mut ). Importantly, IRGM-K mut retains certain activities: it maintains the ability to bind ATG16L1 equally well as the ubiquitination-competent IRGM.

IRGM gene expression is cell-type dependent and responds to both starvation and microbial products. IRGM is particularly inducible in cells (intestinal epithelial cells and macrophages) derived from tissues affected in diseases where IRGM has been implicated as a genetic risk factor: CD and tuberculosis ( Consortium, 2007 ; Craddock et al., 2010 ; Intemann et al., 2009 ). PAMPs induce autophagy in macrophages through IRGM linking the PAMP detection by NOD2 with the autophagic machinery activation ( Figure 7J ). IRGM controls not just initiation of autophagy but may also affect its maturation. IRGM complexes include UVRAG, a regulator of autophagic maturation ( Itakura et al., 2008 ). IRGM displaces Rubicon, known to inhibit maturation complexes ( Matsunaga et al., 2009 ). Thus, IRGM controls several points along the autophagy pathway and contributes to efficient xenophagy.

In conclusion, IRGM orchestrates antimicrobial autophagic responses. We have shown here how IRGM does that and what are the exact molecular processes that IRGM controls. This explains the hitherto mysterious role of IRGM in autophagy, places it at the center of molecular complexes controlling and executing autophagy, and molecularly connects biological inputs with autophagic outputs. Finally, our findings indicate that IRGM links up not only with NOD2 but also with several other PRRs, such as NOD1, RIG-I and TLR3. Thus, IRGM and possibly its distant IRG homologs in other vertebrates may act as transmission modules between a selective sub-repertoire of innate immune responses and the autophagy machinery.
