---
pmid: '27746020'
title: The K48-K63 Branched Ubiquitin Chain Regulates NF-κB Signaling.
authors:
- Ohtake F
- Saeki Y
- Ishido S
- Kanno J
- Tanaka K
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2016.09.014
---

# The K48-K63 Branched Ubiquitin Chain Regulates NF-κB Signaling.
**Authors:** Ohtake F, Saeki Y, Ishido S, Kanno J, Tanaka K
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2016.09.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2016.09.014)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2016 Oct 20;64(2):251-266. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2016.09.014. Epub 
2016 Oct 13.

The K48-K63 Branched Ubiquitin Chain Regulates NF-κB Signaling.

Ohtake F(1), Saeki Y(2), Ishido S(3), Kanno J(4), Tanaka K(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Protein Metabolism, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Tokyo 156-8506, Japan; Division of Cellular and Molecular Toxicology, 
Biological Safety Research Center, National Institute of Health Sciences, Tokyo 
158-8501, Japan. Electronic address: otake-fm@igakuken.or.jp.
(2)Laboratory of Protein Metabolism, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Tokyo 156-8506, Japan.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, Hyogo 
663-8501, Japan.
(4)Division of Cellular and Molecular Toxicology, Biological Safety Research 
Center, National Institute of Health Sciences, Tokyo 158-8501, Japan.
(5)Laboratory of Protein Metabolism, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Tokyo 156-8506, Japan. Electronic address: tanaka-kj@igakuken.or.jp.

Polyubiquitin chains of different topologies regulate diverse cellular 
processes. K48- and K63-linked chains, the two most abundant chain types, 
regulate proteolytic and signaling pathways, respectively. Although recent 
studies reported important roles for heterogeneous chains, the functions of 
branched ubiquitin chains remain unclear. Here, we show that the ubiquitin chain 
branched at K48 and K63 regulates nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) signaling. A 
mass-spectrometry-based quantification strategy revealed that K48-K63 branched 
ubiquitin linkages are abundant in cells. In response to interleukin-1β, the E3 
ubiquitin ligase HUWE1 generates K48 branches on K63 chains formed by TRAF6, 
yielding K48-K63 branched chains. The K48-K63 branched linkage permits 
recognition by TAB2 but protects K63 linkages from CYLD-mediated 
deubiquitylation, thereby amplifying NF-κB signals. These results reveal a 
previously unappreciated cooperation between K48 and K63 linkages that generates 
a unique coding signal: ubiquitin chain branching differentially controls 
readout of the ubiquitin code by specific reader and eraser proteins to activate 
NF-κB signaling.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2016.09.014
PMID: 27746020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
