---
pmid: '9662397'
title: BRCA1 protein is linked to the RNA polymerase II holoenzyme complex via RNA
  helicase A.
authors:
- Anderson SF
- Schlegel BP
- Nakajima T
- Wolpin ES
- Parvin JD
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/930
---

# BRCA1 protein is linked to the RNA polymerase II holoenzyme complex via RNA helicase A.
**Authors:** Anderson SF, Schlegel BP, Nakajima T, Wolpin ES, Parvin JD
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/930](https://doi.org/10.1038/930)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 1998 Jul;19(3):254-6. doi: 10.1038/930.

BRCA1 protein is linked to the RNA polymerase II holoenzyme complex via RNA 
helicase A.

Anderson SF(1), Schlegel BP, Nakajima T, Wolpin ES, Parvin JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The breast cancer specific tumour suppressor protein, BRCA1 (refs 1,2), 
activates transcription when linked with a DNA-binding domain and is a component 
of the RNA polymerase II (Pol II) holoenzyme. We show here that RNA helicase A 
(RHA) protein links BRCA1 to the holoenzyme complex. The region of BRCA1 which 
interacts with RHA and, thus, the holoenzyme complex, corresponds to subregions 
of the BRCT domain of BRCA1 (ref. 9). This interaction was shown to occur in 
yeast nuclei, and expression in human cells of a truncated RHA molecule which 
retains binding to BRCA1 inhibited transcriptional activation mediated by the 
BRCA1 carboxy terminus. These data are the first to identify a specific protein 
interaction with the BRCA1 C-terminal domain and are consistent with the model 
that BRCA1 functions as a transcriptional coactivator.

DOI: 10.1038/930
PMID: 9662397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
