---
pmid: '16199867'
title: Nucleophosmin is required for DNA integrity and p19Arf protein stability.
authors:
- Colombo E
- Bonetti P
- Lazzerini Denchi E
- Martinelli P
- Zamponi R
- Marine JC
- Helin K
- Falini B
- Pelicci PG
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC1265791
doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.20.8874-8886.2005
---

# Nucleophosmin is required for DNA integrity and p19Arf protein stability.
**Authors:** Colombo E, Bonetti P, Lazzerini Denchi E, Martinelli P, Zamponi R, Marine JC, Helin K, Falini B, Pelicci PG
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.25.20.8874-8886.2005](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.25.20.8874-8886.2005)
**PMC:** [PMC1265791](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1265791/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;25(20):8874-86. doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.20.8874-8886.2005.

Nucleophosmin is required for DNA integrity and p19Arf protein stability.

Colombo E(1), Bonetti P, Lazzerini Denchi E, Martinelli P, Zamponi R, Marine JC, 
Helin K, Falini B, Pelicci PG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Milan, 
Italy.

Nucleophosmin (NPM) is a nucleolar phosphoprotein that binds the tumor 
suppressors p53 and p19(Arf) and is thought to be indispensable for ribogenesis, 
cell proliferation, and survival after DNA damage. The NPM gene is the most 
frequent target of genetic alterations in leukemias and lymphomas, though its 
role in tumorigenesis is unknown. We report here the first characterization of a 
mouse NPM knockout strain. Lack of NPM expression results in accumulation of DNA 
damage, activation of p53, widespread apoptosis, and mid-stage embryonic 
lethality. Fibroblasts explanted from null embryos fail to grow and rapidly 
acquire a senescent phenotype. Transfer of the NPM mutation into a p53-null 
background rescued apoptosis in vivo and fibroblast proliferation in vitro. 
Cells null for both p53 and NPM grow faster than control cells and are more 
susceptible to transformation by activated oncogenes, such as mutated Ras or 
overexpressed Myc. In the absence of NPM, Arf protein is excluded from nucleoli 
and is markedly less stable. Our data demonstrate that NPM regulates DNA 
integrity and, through Arf, inhibits cell proliferation and are consistent with 
a putative tumor-suppressive function of NPM.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.25.20.8874-8886.2005
PMCID: PMC1265791
PMID: 16199867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Nucleophosmin (NPM) is a nucleolar phosphoprotein that binds the tumor suppressors p53 and p19 Arf and is thought to be indispensable for ribogenesis, cell proliferation, and survival after DNA damage. The NPM gene is the most frequent target of genetic alterations in leukemias and lymphomas, though its role in tumorigenesis is unknown. We report here the first characterization of a mouse NPM knockout strain. Lack of NPM expression results in accumulation of DNA damage, activation of p53, widespread apoptosis, and mid-stage embryonic lethality. Fibroblasts explanted from null embryos fail to grow and rapidly acquire a senescent phenotype. Transfer of the NPM mutation into a p53-null background rescued apoptosis in vivo and fibroblast proliferation in vitro. Cells null for both p53 and NPM grow faster than control cells and are more susceptible to transformation by activated oncogenes, such as mutated Ras or overexpressed Myc. In the absence of NPM, Arf protein is excluded from nucleoli and is markedly less stable. Our data demonstrate that NPM regulates DNA integrity and, through Arf, inhibits cell proliferation and are consistent with a putative tumor-suppressive function of NPM.

DISCUSSION

We have demonstrated that the loss of NPM expression provokes activation of a DNA damage response, suggesting that one physiological function of NPM is to ensure DNA integrity. This is consistent with earlier work showing the involvement of NPM in the process of DNA repair after treatment with different DNA-damaging agents, including UV light ( 41 ). How NPM participates in DNA repair is not fully understood. NPM is part of a multiprotein complex that possesses DNA recombination activity on immunoglobulin heavy-chain switch region sequences ( 5 ). In vitro, NPM promotes DNA single-strand reannealing and mediates D-loop formation ( 5 ), suggesting that it may participate in the first steps of a recombination reaction (pairing of DNA substrates, strand invasion, and formation of stable joint molecules). Alternatively, NPM might function as a histone chaperone after DNA lesions are repaired, during the assembly of new nucleosomes. In fact, NPM binds histones and favors nucleosome assembly in vitro ( 26 ).

Due to accumulation of damaged DNA, cells lacking NPM activate a DNA damage response, which involves p53 activation and leads to senescence or apoptosis. In fact, fibroblasts explanted from NPM −/− embryos undergo growth arrest when grown in culture, while fibroblasts from p53 −/− NPM −/− embryos can be easily propagated in culture. The availability of double-knockout fibroblasts allowed us to investigate the effect of NPM expression on cellular growth. Clearly, NPM expression is not critical for ribogenesis and cell proliferation. Double-knockout fibroblasts grow faster than control cells and are more susceptible to transformation by activated oncogenes, such as RasV12 or c- myc . Notably, we also found increased numbers of proliferating cells in the NPM −/− embryos, suggesting that one additional function of NPM is to inhibit cellular proliferation.

The inhibitory effect exerted by NPM on cell proliferation might be mediated by Arf. Arf protein is polyubiquitinated at its N terminus and its degradation depends on the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway ( 21 ). NPM binds the Arf protein and protects it from degradation ( 21 ). Indeed, the stability of Arf protein is markedly decreased in cells that lack NPM expression. However, inhibition of the proteasome only partially restores the stability of p19 Arf mutants that do not bind NPM ( 21 ), suggesting that NPM protects Arf from both proteasome-dependent and -independent degradation.

The amino-terminal region of Arf is dynamically disordered in aqueous solution and becomes highly structured upon binding to Mdm2, suggesting that, in vivo, Arf is an intrinsically unstructured protein that folds on binding to its biological substrates ( 6 ). NPM might bind newly synthesized Arf and serve as a molecular chaperone to favor acquisition of a tertiary and stable structure, thus preventing its degradation or aggregation.

However, when complexed to NPM, Arf maintains a free N terminus and can be ubiquitinated ( 21 ). The leukemia-associated NPM mutant retains the ability to interact with Arf, but it fails to prevent its degradation. Notably, this mutant is unable to enter the nucleus and localizes mainly in the cytoplasm, suggesting that one mechanism through which NPM protects Arf from degradation is by ensuring its proper nucleolar or nucleoplasmic localization.

Whether these two activities of NPM, regulation of DNA integrity and of Arf protein stability, are functionally linked remains unknown. DNA-damaging agents provoke the mobilization of nucleolar NPM into the nucleoplasm ( 22 ), and its binding to chromatin ( 28 ). Oncogene expression induces up-regulation of Arf and, like the DNA-damaging agents, the partial nucleoplasmic mobilization of NPM ( 9 ). NPM, in turn, is indispensable for the full stabilization of Arf proteins after oncogene expression. Recent findings indicate that oncogene-driven cell divisions induce a DNA damage response which might be responsible for activation of the Arf-p53 pathway after oncogene expression ( 2 ). Thus, NPM might function as specialized chaperone in the cellular response to DNA damage, to coordinate arrest of cell proliferation and DNA repair through its effects on Arf stability and chromatin, respectively.

Regardless of the underlying molecular mechanisms, these activities of NPM might be relevant for the inherent ability of cells to suppress transformation. NPM is frequently mutated in leukemias ( 13 ) and lymphomas ( 24 ), suggesting that inactivation of the putative NPM tumor suppressor activities might be critical for transformation. The leukemia-associated NPM mutant competes with wild-type NPM in binding Arf, is unable to protect it from degradation, and provokes its delocalization in the cytoplasm (submitted for publication). Thus, in leukemias carrying a mutated NPM allele, the levels of Arf protein are decreased and the protein itself is delocalized, suggesting that mutations of NPM lead to functional inactivation of the Arf tumor suppressor pathway.
