---
pmid: '17599062'
title: CDIP, a novel pro-apoptotic gene, regulates TNFalpha-mediated apoptosis in
  a p53-dependent manner.
authors:
- Brown L
- Ongusaha PP
- Kim HG
- Nuti S
- Mandinova A
- Lee JW
- Khosravi-Far R
- Aaronson SA
- Lee SW
journal: EMBO J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1933410
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601779
---

# CDIP, a novel pro-apoptotic gene, regulates TNFalpha-mediated apoptosis in a p53-dependent manner.
**Authors:** Brown L, Ongusaha PP, Kim HG, Nuti S, Mandinova A, Lee JW, Khosravi-Far R, Aaronson SA, Lee SW
**Journal:** EMBO J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601779](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601779)
**PMC:** [PMC1933410](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1933410/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2007 Jul 25;26(14):3410-22. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601779. Epub 2007
Jun  28.

CDIP, a novel pro-apoptotic gene, regulates TNFalpha-mediated apoptosis in a 
p53-dependent manner.

Brown L(1), Ongusaha PP, Kim HG, Nuti S, Mandinova A, Lee JW, Khosravi-Far R, 
Aaronson SA, Lee SW.

Author information:
(1)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

We have identified a novel pro-apoptotic p53 target gene named CDIP (Cell Death 
Involved p53-target). Inhibition of CDIP abrogates p53-mediated apoptotic 
responses, demonstrating that CDIP is an important p53 apoptotic effector. CDIP 
itself potently induces apoptosis that is associated with caspase-8 cleavage, 
implicating the extrinsic cell death pathway in apoptosis mediated by CDIP. 
siRNA-directed knockdown of caspase-8 results in a severe impairment of 
CDIP-dependent cell death. In investigating the potential involvement of 
extrinsic cell death pathway in CDIP-mediated apoptosis, we found that TNF-alpha 
expression tightly correlates with CDIP expression, and that inhibition of 
TNF-alpha signaling attenuates CDIP-dependent apoptosis. We also demonstrate 
that TNF-alpha is upregulated in response to p53 and p53 inducing genotoxic 
stress, in a CDIP-dependent manner. Consistently, knockdown of TNF-alpha impairs 
p53-mediated stress-induced apoptosis. Together, these findings support a novel 
p53 --> CDIP --> TNF-alpha apoptotic pathway that directs apoptosis after 
exposure of cells to genotoxic stress. Thus, CDIP provides a new link between 
p53-mediated intrinsic and death receptor-mediated extrinsic apoptotic 
signaling, providing a novel target for cancer therapeutics aimed at maximizing 
the p53 apoptotic response of cancer cells to drug therapy.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601779
PMCID: PMC1933410
PMID: 17599062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

We have identified a novel pro-apoptotic p53 target gene named CDIP (Cell Death Involved p53-target). Inhibition of CDIP abrogates p53-mediated apoptotic responses, demonstrating that CDIP is an important p53 apoptotic effector. CDIP itself potently induces apoptosis that is associated with caspase-8 cleavage, implicating the extrinsic cell death pathway in apoptosis mediated by CDIP. siRNA-directed knockdown of caspase-8 results in a severe impairment of CDIP-dependent cell death. In investigating the potential involvement of extrinsic cell death pathway in CDIP-mediated apoptosis, we found that TNF-α expression tightly correlates with CDIP expression, and that inhibition of TNF-α signaling attenuates CDIP-dependent apoptosis. We also demonstrate that TNF-α is upregulated in response to p53 and p53 inducing genotoxic stress, in a CDIP-dependent manner. Consistently, knockdown of TNF-α impairs p53-mediated stress-induced apoptosis. Together, these findings support a novel p53 → CDIP → TNF-α apoptotic pathway that directs apoptosis after exposure of cells to genotoxic stress. Thus, CDIP provides a new link between p53-mediated intrinsic and death receptor-mediated extrinsic apoptotic signaling, providing a novel target for cancer therapeutics aimed at maximizing the p53 apoptotic response of cancer cells to drug therapy.

Introduction

Aberrant cellular proliferation and the evasion of apoptosis are recognized as key events in the progression of normal cells to a cancerous phenotype ( Hanahan and Weinberg, 2000 ). The p53 tumor suppressor protein is activated in response to inappropriate growth signals and various forms of cellular stress (e.g., DNA damage), and functions as a transcription factor to promote antiproliferative responses, including cell cycle arrest and apoptosis ( Oren, 2003 ). The apoptotic function of p53 has been suggested to be foremost with respect to its ability to function as a tumor suppressor ( Symonds et al , 1994 ).

Although the mechanism by which p53 activates G1 arrest is well characterized and involves primarily the transcriptional activation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 Waf1 ( el-Deiry et al , 1993 ; Brugarolas et al , 1995 ; Deng et al , 1995 ), apoptosis induced by p53 is proving to be a much more complex cellular process. Two general mechanisms of apoptosis have been described for mammalian cells: the intrinsic pathway, activated in response to cellular stresses (e.g., exposure to DNA damaging agents), and the extrinsic pathway initiated at the cell surface upon activation of death receptors by binding of their cognate ligands ( Peter and Krammer, 2003 ; Lowe et al , 2004 ). p53-mediated apoptosis has been shown to be dependent upon the Apaf1/caspase-9 intrinsic cell death pathway, which involves the release of cytochrome c from the mitochondria into the cytosol and caspse-9 activation ( Soengas et al , 1999 ; Schuler et al , 2000 ). To date, numerous p53-induced gene targets have been identified, a subset of which have an apparent proapoptotic role in the intrinsic cell death pathway; Bax, Noxa, PUMA and p53AIP proteins localize to the mitochondria and potentiate the release of cytochrome c ( Benchimol, 2001 ).

The extrinsic death pathway is initiated by the TNF-α family of cytokines (e.g., TNF-α, FasL and TRAIL), all of which can act as extracellular activators of apoptosis upon binding to their cognate receptors ( Baud and Karin, 2001 ; Chen and Goeddel, 2002 ). The resulting form of cell death involves caspase-8 activation, which directly activates downstream effector caspases, and/or amplifies the death signal through the mitochondria ( Thorburn, 2004 ). Increasing evidence suggests that p53 may signal to the extrinsic death receptor pathway when triggering an apoptotic response. Two members of the TNFR superfamily, Fas/CD95/APO-1 and KILLER/DR5, have been shown to be regulated in a p53-dependent manner in response to genotoxic drugs ( Owen-Schaub et al , 1995 ; Wu et al , 1997 ; Muller et al , 1998 ), and Fas/CD95/APO-1 has been shown to be required for an optimum apoptotic response upon exposure to DNA damage ( Friesen et al , 1996 ; Muller et al , 1997 ; Embree-Ku et al , 2002 ). The precise nature of the p53 transcriptional program required for apoptosis has not yet been fully elucidated.

We identified CDIP as a novel p53 induced protein, and key downstream effector of p53-dependent apoptosis. CDIP itself is a potent inducer of apoptosis. CDIP-dependent apoptosis is associated with caspase-8 activation, implicating the extrinsic death receptor-signaling pathway as the mechanism by which CDIP mediates cell death. This line of investigation revealed that TNF-α is induced in a CDIP-dependent manner downstream of p53 expression or DNA damage. Importantly, apoptosis under similar conditions was compromised in cells depleted of TNF-α or inhibited of FADD, another mediator of the extrinsic cell death signal. Thus, CDIP is an important component of the p53-mediated apoptotic response, and represents a novel link between p53 and the extrinsic death receptor-mediated pathway of apoptosis.

Discussion

In this study, we identify CDIP as a novel pro-apoptotic p53 target gene. CDIP was identified as a p53-responsive gene through a cDNA expression array that compared gene expression under p53-induced and non-induced conditions. We demonstrate that CDIP is upregulated in a p53-dependent manner in several cell lines. p53-dependent CDIP upregulation likely occurs by direct transcriptional activation; CDIP contains four p53 consensus binding sites within its promoter region, the most 5′ of which is bound by p53 and required for p53-dependent transcriptional activation. CDIP is highly expressed in cells undergoing apoptosis in response to p53 expression and p53 activation by genotoxic stress. Significantly, shRNA-directed inhibition of CDIP abrogates p53-mediated apoptosis, placing CDIP among other important pro-apoptotic p53 targets that attenuate p53-dependent apoptosis when disrupted by RNA inhibition and gene depletion strategies. However, it is not yet possible to attribute the full apoptotic effects of p53 to any one of its pro-apoptotic gene targets, and further studies are required to elucidate how these genes interact (e.g., playing redundant or cooperative roles in p53-mediated apoptosis), and whether they act in a cell- and/or stimulus-specific manner. Indeed, we observed some attenuation of ETO-induced apoptosis upon siRNA targeting of Puma and Noxa that was likely a contribution of p53 acting independently of CDIP.

Interestingly, the expression of CDIP alone is sufficient to induce apoptosis. CDIP-dependent apoptosis is accompanied by caspase-8 cleavage, implicating the extrinsic cell death pathway as a mediator of the CDIP-induced death signal. Consistent with this, we demonstrate that CDIP-dependent apoptosis is almost entirely dependent on caspase-8 and also, to a large extent, on TNF-α and FADD. Inhibiting TNF-α (by shRNA and neutralizing antibody) and FADD (by the expression of a dominant-interfering mutant) produced a less complete block of CDIP-induced in comparison to the effects of caspase-8 inhibition; thus, we cannot rule out the possibility that CDIP utilizes other effectors of apoptosis (i.e., that also require caspase-8) to transduce its death signal.

CDIP expression tightly correlates with TNF-α expression, and we found that CDIP regulates TNF-α expression through mechanisms involving both transcriptional upregulation of the TNF-α promoter and increased TNF-α mRNA stability. As CDIP is here shown to be an important effector of p53-dependent apoptosis, these results suggest that TNF-α also plays a role in apoptosis induced by p53. In fact, exposure of cells to genotoxic stress, and the expression of exogenous p53 in Saos2 cells, results in TNF-α upregulation that is dependent upon CDIP. Moreover, depletion of TNF-α attenuates both drug- and CDIP-induced apoptosis, which taken together support a novel p53 → CDIP → TNF-α death-signaling pathway. This contrasts previous studies that show that primary lymphocyte cell populations, harboring defects in the extrinsic death-receptor pathway, display no impairment of p53-mediated apoptosis ( Newton and Strasser, 2000 ; Salmena et al , 2003 ). It is plausible that in transformed cells, with an inherently high proliferative rate, thus, increased sensitivity to death stimuli, ( Lowe et al , 2004 ), the p53 apoptotic program is very different in comparison to primary cells.

TNF-α orchestrates pleiotropic functions not only in the host immune response but also in control of cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis ( Wajant et al , 2003 ; Muppidi et al , 2004 ). Physiologically, the secretion of TNF-α is highly localized and transient, and the regulatory mechanisms that control TNF-α expression allowing for such diverse cellular processes as proliferation and apoptosis have not been fully elucidated. The TNF-α promoter contains binding sites for a number of transcription factors (e.g., NF-κB , Ap-1, STAT1, CREBP), and the recently identified factor, LITAF (LPS-Induced TNF-α Factor) ( Myokai et al , 1999 ; Tang et al , 2003 ), also known as PIG7 ( Polyak et al , 1997 ). A search for conserved protein domains within the predicted CDIP amino-acid sequence identified a LITAF domain in the C-terminal region (amino acids 124–183; Supplementary Figure 1 ), originally described for the LITAF/PIG7 protein. Like CDIP, LITAF/PIG7 is a known target of p53 that is induced under conditions of cellular stress that cause apoptosis ( Polyak et al , 1997 ). LITAF/PIG7 has also been shown to upregulate TNF-α expression in response to LPS ( Myokai et al , 1999 ; Tang et al , 2003 ), however, it is unlikely that LPS can upregulate TNF-α through CDIP, since CDIP is not induced by LPS. The pro-apoptotic potential of LITAF/PIG7 has not been comprehensively tested, and it will be interesting to determine whether it promotes cell death through a mechanism similar to that of CDIP. It also is possible that p53 acts through LITAF/PIG7 to transcriptionally regulate TNF-α expression.

Although members of the TNF death receptor family signal apoptosis independently of p53, interactions between p53-dependent intrinsic apoptotic pathway and the death receptor-mediated extrinsic apoptotic pathway are well documented. For example, p53-dependent upregulation is believed to be responsible for the induction of Fas/CD95/APO-1 in response to DNA damaging agents in several different cell types ( Muller et al , 1997 , 1998 ; Miyake et al , 1998 ). Also, the TRAIL receptor, KILLER/DR5, is upregulated in cells undergoing apoptosis in response chemotherapeutic agents and γ-irradiation in a p53-dependent manner ( Wu et al , 1997 , 1999 ). Both Fas/CD95/APO1 and KIILER/DR5 contain genomic p53 consensus binding sites that likely mediate p53-dependent transcriptional activation of these death receptor genes ( Muller et al , 1998 ; Takimoto and El-Deiry, 2000 ). Our demonstration that inhibiting TNF-α signaling attenuates apoptosis in response to genotoxic stress further supports a role for the extrinsic pathway in p53-mediated apoptosis.

Overall, our demonstration that CDIP is a p53 target provides additional insights into the p53-mediated apoptotic response, suggesting a novel network in which CDIP is important for regulating TNF-α expression downstream of p53. Thus, it is plausible that impaired CDIP induction in response to p53 activation by genotoxic stress, and the subsequent failure of consequent downstream signaling events leading to cell death, confers a survival advantage to tumor-prone cells, allowing them to escape apoptosis. In support of this view, the basal level of CDIP expression is higher in normal cell strains, such as non-diploid human fibroblasts, compared to transformed cells (unpublished observations), suggesting that loss of CDIP function may be a genetic event that promotes tumor progression. In summary, identifying the components of this unrecognized cell death pathway, from p53 → CDIP → TNF-α to death receptor-mediated cell death, provides an opportunity for therapeutic intervention, as it reveals a novel target for drug design that could potentially maximize the p53 response and sensitize tumor cells to cancer therapy.
