---
pmid: '31974171'
title: Type I Interferon Regulates a Coordinated Gene Network to Enhance Cytotoxic
  T Cell-Mediated Tumor Killing.
authors:
- Fan JB
- Miyauchi S
- Xu HZ
- Liu D
- Kim LJY
- Burkart C
- Cheng H
- Arimoto KI
- Yan M
- Zhou Y
- Győrffy B
- Knobeloch KP
- Rich JN
- Cang H
- Fu XD
- Zhang DE
journal: Cancer Discov
year: '2020'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC7058499
doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-19-0608
---

# Type I Interferon Regulates a Coordinated Gene Network to Enhance Cytotoxic T Cell-Mediated Tumor Killing.
**Authors:** Fan JB, Miyauchi S, Xu HZ, Liu D, Kim LJY, Burkart C, Cheng H, Arimoto KI, Yan M, Zhou Y, Győrffy B, Knobeloch KP, Rich JN, Cang H, Fu XD, Zhang DE
**Journal:** Cancer Discov (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1158/2159-8290.CD-19-0608](https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.CD-19-0608)
**PMC:** [PMC7058499](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7058499/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Discov. 2020 Mar;10(3):382-393. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-19-0608. Epub
 2020 Jan 23.

Type I Interferon Regulates a Coordinated Gene Network to Enhance Cytotoxic T 
Cell-Mediated Tumor Killing.

Fan JB(1), Miyauchi S(2), Xu HZ(3), Liu D(2), Kim LJY(4)(5), Burkart C(2), Cheng 
H(2), Arimoto KI(2), Yan M(2), Zhou Y(6), Győrffy B(7)(8)(9), Knobeloch KP(10), 
Rich JN(4), Cang H(3), Fu XD(11), Zhang DE(1)(12).

Author information:
(1)Moores UCSD Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
California. d7zhang@ucsd.edu jbfan@ucsd.edu.
(2)Moores UCSD Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
California.
(3)The Salk Institute for Biological Sciences, La Jolla, California.
(4)Division of Regenerative Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California.
(5)Medical Scientist Training Program, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, Ohio.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Science, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(7)Department of Bioinformatics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(8)2nd Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(9)TTK Lendület Cancer Biomarker Research Group, Budapest, Hungary.
(10)Institute of Neuropathology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(11)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Institute of Genomic 
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California.
(12)Department of Pathology and Division of Biological Sciences, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California.

Type I interferons (IFN), which activate many IFN-stimulated genes (ISG), are 
known to regulate tumorigenesis. However, little is known regarding how various 
ISGs coordinate with one another in developing antitumor effects. Here, we 
report that the ISG UBA7 is a tumor suppressor in breast cancer. UBA7 encodes an 
enzyme that catalyzes the covalent conjugation of the ubiquitin-like protein 
product of another ISG (ISG15) to cellular proteins in a process known as 
"ISGylation." ISGylation of other ISGs, including STAT1 and STAT2, 
synergistically facilitates production of chemokine-receptor ligands to attract 
cytotoxic T cells. These gene-activation events are further linked to clustering 
and nuclear relocalization of STAT1/2 within IFN-induced promyelocytic leukemia 
(PML) bodies. Importantly, this coordinated ISG-ISGylation network plays a 
central role in suppressing murine breast cancer growth and metastasis, which 
parallels improved survival in patients with breast cancer. These findings 
reveal a cooperative IFN-inducible gene network in orchestrating a 
tumor-suppressive microenvironment. SIGNIFICANCE: We report a highly cooperative 
ISG network, in which UBA7-mediated ISGylation facilitates clustering of 
transcription factors and activates an antitumor gene-expression program. These 
findings provide mechanistic insights into immune evasion in breast cancer 
associated with UBA7 loss, emphasizing the importance of a functional 
ISG-ISGylation network in tumor suppression.This article is highlighted in the 
In This Issue feature, p. 327.

©2020 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-19-0608
PMCID: PMC7058499
PMID: 31974171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Type I interferons (IFNs), which activate many IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs), are known to regulate tumorigenesis. However, little is known regarding how various ISGs coordinate with one another in developing anti-tumor effects. Here we report that the ISG, UBA7 , is a tumor suppressor in breast cancer. UBA7 encodes an enzyme that catalyzes the covalent conjugation of the ubiquitin-like protein product of another ISG ( ISG15 ) to cellular proteins in a process known as “ISGylation”. ISGylation of other ISGs, including STAT1 and STAT2, synergistically facilitates production of chemokine-receptor ligands to attract cytotoxic T cells. These gene activation events are further linked to clustering and nuclear relocalization of STAT½ within IFN-induced PML bodies. Importantly, this coordinated ISG–ISGylation network plays a central role in suppressing murine breast cancer growth and metastasis, which parallels improved survival in breast cancer patients. These findings reveal a cooperative IFN-inducible gene network in orchestrating a tumor suppressive microenvironment.

Introduction

The cellular and noncellular components of the tumoral niche create a specific tumor microenvironment (TME), where cells continuously sense danger and damage signaling by extracellular and intracellular pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) to balance the acts of the host immune system ( 1 ). One key event is the production of type I interferons (IFNs) in response to the activation of specific PRRs, such as cyclic GMP-AMP (cGAMP) synthase (cGAS), which plays a central role in regulating TME ( 2 ). IFNs activate the Janus Kinase (JAK)-Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STAT) pathway, resulting in the induction of hundreds of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) ( 3 ), many of which remain uncharacterized ( 4 ). In general, it is thought that each of these ISGs may activate a pathway and multiple activated pathways collectively contribute to the overall anti-tumor effect. However, little is known regarding which ISGs are key drivers to the development of the anti-tumor effect and how these ISGs might coordinate with one another.

Type I IFNs have been well established to orchestrate both innate and adaptive immune response in cancer ( 2 , 5 , 6 ). This is accomplished by mobilizing diverse cell types in the host immune system, including natural killer cells, dendritic cells, tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), B cells and T cells ( 5 – 7 ). A critical step in gaining anti-tumor immunity is to increase the traffic of activated effector T cells, such as cytotoxic CD8 + T cells, to infiltrate into the tumor bed to recognize and kill target cancer cells ( 2 , 7 ). While playing a central role in regulating T cell priming and homing in the TME ( 2 ), excessive IFN signaling is also known to modulate the TME to disable the anti-tumor function of effector T cells ( 8 ). These complex biological responses likely result from pleiotropic actions of ISGs and various feedback control mechanisms, which appear to be highly dependent on specific tumor contexts ( 4 , 9 ). Therefore, an important goal in enhancing anti-tumor immune response is to identify key ISG-mediated pathways that favor the development of an anti-tumor microenvironment, while minimizing the impact of those with adverse effects.

One such ISG, UBA7 , encodes an ubiquitin-like modifier activating enzyme (UBA7, also known as UBE1L) that catalyzes the covalent conjugation of the ubiquitin-like protein product of another ISG ( ISG15 ) to additional ISGs as well as other cellular proteins in a process termed “protein ISGylation” ( 10 ). ISG15 is conjugated to a host of proteins in response to propagate the effects of IFN stimulation and is known to play a role in anti-viral immunity, but the cellular consequences of UBA7-dependent ISGylation in the setting of cancer cells is not completely understood. Here, we uncover a regulatory network in which multiple UBA7-targeted ISGs act in a concerted fashion to activate key chemokines and attract cytotoxic T cells to the tumor bed. These findings reveal a synergistic ISG-mediated cellular program to achieve effective anti-tumor response in the host.

Discussion

Type I IFNs activate expression of hundreds of ISGs and regulate tumorigenesis and response to cancer therapy through both tumor cell intrinsic and extrinsic mechanisms ( 5 , 6 ). However, it has remained unclear regarding the roles of many individual ISGs in cancer. Therefore, understanding the functional interplay between ISGs may provide novel therapeutic interventions in treating human cancers. Here, we identified the ISGylation activating enzyme UBA7 as a key ISG in regulating malignant progression. Interestingly, nearly all of the enzymes involved in protein ISGylation, including the E1, E2, E3 and the deconjugating enzyme, are ISGs themselves, suggesting their tight link to IFN-regulated cellular functions. Protein ISGylation thus affords a unique angle to look into IFN-induced gene networks that may synergistically function in the development of anti-tumor activities. Our current work uncovers that IFN-inducible protein ISGylation network has an immunostimulatory function by facilitating CXCR3 ligand expression and cytotoxic T cell infiltration in orchestrating a tumor suppressive microenvironment. It is worth noting that ISGylation-induced tumor microenvironment also decreased tumor-associated macrophages. Although TAMs are known to have a limited role in regulating spontaneous and allograft PyVmT tumor growth ( 17 , 18 , 27 ), they do play important roles in regulating metastatic potential ( 18 ) and response to cancer therapies in PyVmT tumors ( 17 , 27 ). Thus, future studies may be geared toward understanding the contribution of protein ISGylation to regulated TAMs during tumor metastasis and/or response to cancer therapies.

Several in vitro studies on human cancer cell lines have revealed both positive and negative roles of protein ISGylation in breast cancer ( 28 , 29 ). For example, ISG15 and protein ISGylation have been implicated in promoting invasive properties of malignant breast cancer cell lines through modulation of cytoskeletal architecture ( 29 ). On the other hand, ISGylation of ΔNp63α appears to ablate the ability of ΔNp63α to promote anchorage-independent cell growth and tumor formation ( 28 ). While these findings collectively suggest context-dependent effects of protein ISGylation in cancer, it is important to keep in mind that IFN responses are part of the adaptive and innate immune systems in the host, thus emphasizing the importance of studying the impact of protein ISGylation on cancer progression in immunocompetent hosts. Using immunocompetent hosts, our current work highlights the importance of protein ISGylation in orchestrating a tumor-suppressive microenvironment. This mechanism is well in line with our analysis of human cancer transcriptomes and associated clinical outcomes. While it is possible that ISGylation may enhance or suppress tumorigenesis in different contexts, just like IFN treatment, our data provide direct evidence to support the function of UBA7 as a key tumor suppressor in breast cancer. This is further corroborated by frequent chromosome 3p21.3 deletions where UBA7 resides in human cancer ( 30 ). Our findings suggest a mechanism underlying these genetic alterations in cancer.

We observed that the presence of protein ISGylation facilitates TLR¾ signaling-activated CXCR3 ligand expression in our current model. TLR4 signaling is activated by a variety of ligands, including DAMPs ( 22 , 31 ), and interestingly, certain ISGs (e.g. IFI35, NMI) are known to function as DAMPs ( 32 ). In addition, women with breast cancer have higher relative abundance of Bacillus, Enterobacteriaceae and Staphylococcus in their breast tissues ( 33 ) and TLR3 signaling-stimulated expression of CXCR3 ligands have also been well characterized to play critical roles in regulating tumor microenvironment and anti-tumor immunity ( 19 , 34 ). These prior observations are fully in line with the impact of loss-of-function TLR3 or TLR4 alleles in breast cancer patients who relapse more quickly and show reduced overall survival after therapeutic intervention ( 21 , 22 ), together indicating the importance of both TLRs in modulating anti-cancer immunity. Although we did not observe ISGylation-facilitated chemokine expression in the presence of polydAdT under investigated conditions, we cannot rule out the possibility that ISGylation may still contribute to signaling activation by other various endogenous stimuli, including some form of DNA released from damaged tissues, in the tumor microenvironment.

Our mechanistic studies have linked IFN priming to the dynamic regulation of PML bodies. PML is encoded by an ISG and IFN signaling is known to induce the formation of PML bodies in the nucleus ( 25 ). PML has been implicated in the regulation of type I IFN-induced ISGs in cell lines, albeit with unknown mechanisms ( 35 ). Using super-resolution microscopy, our current studies reveal that protein ISGylation enhances condensation of critical transcription factors, STAT1 and STAT2, and their association with PML bodies. We further observe that ISGylation-dependent chemokine expression requires the presence of PML nuclear bodies, together supporting a model in which PML nuclear bodies may contribute to the formation of a favorable nuclear environment for the expression of specific genes ( 36 ). It is entirely possible that microscopically detected PML bodies are indicative of IFN-induced condensation of both visible and invisible PML-containing complexes in the nucleus, which may underlie the IFN-induced and ISGylation-mediated gene expression program. Our findings join the recent discovery that sumoylation and the SUMO Interaction Motif (SIM) in PML bodies contributes to multivalent interactions within PML bodies ( 25 , 37 ), together suggesting that multiple post-transcriptional modifications are involved in modulating phase separation to account for the dynamic compositional control of PML bodies. It is important to point out that PML has been shown to function as a tumor suppressor in several cancer types, including breast cancer ( 38 ), but elevated PML expression has also been connected to the acquisition of aggressiveness and metastatic features in breast tumors ( 39 ). Additionally, the importance of PML in regulating the immune response has been reported in a mouse model of prostate cancer ( 40 ). These seemingly contradictory observations might reflect the winning versus losing battles of the host immune system to different tumors.

The most important concept conveyed in this work is a cooperative gene network of ISGs, which is shaped by UBA7-mediated ISGylation to form a favorable nuclear environment for STAT½-mediated chemokine expression. These cancer-cell autonomous effects provide mechanistic insights into the regulation of cytotoxic T cell infiltration into such tumor microenvironment when PRR-triggered type I IFN signaling is in synergy with activation of other inflammatory pathways, such as DMAPs-induced TLRs activation. Previous ChIP-seq studies have shown binding of AP-1, NF-κB, STAT½ and IRF3 on enhancers of CXCR3 ligands in TLRs-activated cells ( 41 ). Therefore, protein ISGylation regulated clustering of STATs may facilitate their assembly on IFN-stimulated response elements (ISREs) to form “enhanceosome” ( 42 ), thereby inducing gene expression according to our working model ( Figure S21 ). Importantly, by dissecting the functions of some key ISGs in this network, we suggest a potential strategy to enhance the ISGylation-induced anti-cancer effect through deactivating its negative regulator USP18. Such enhanced ISGylation may also help divert tumor-prone activities of ISG15 by reducing free ISG15 in the TME. This and other potential modulations of the ISG network may therefore amplify the anti-tumor effects of IFN-based cancer therapies, while limiting other cancer-promoting events.
