---
pmid: '21498574'
title: Phosphorylation-dependent regulation of the F-BAR protein Hof1 during cytokinesis.
authors:
- Meitinger F
- Boehm ME
- Hofmann A
- Hub B
- Zentgraf H
- Lehmann WD
- Pereira G
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3078711
doi: 10.1101/gad.622411
---

# Phosphorylation-dependent regulation of the F-BAR protein Hof1 during cytokinesis.
**Authors:** Meitinger F, Boehm ME, Hofmann A, Hub B, Zentgraf H, Lehmann WD, Pereira G
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.622411](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.622411)
**PMC:** [PMC3078711](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3078711/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2011 Apr 15;25(8):875-88. doi: 10.1101/gad.622411.

Phosphorylation-dependent regulation of the F-BAR protein Hof1 during 
cytokinesis.

Meitinger F(1), Boehm ME, Hofmann A, Hub B, Zentgraf H, Lehmann WD, Pereira G.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology of Centrosomes and Cilia Unit, DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, German 
Cancer Research Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Spatial and timely coordination of cytokinesis is crucial for the maintenance of 
organelle inheritance and genome integrity. The mitotic exit network (MEN) 
pathway controls both the timely initiation of mitotic exit and cytokinesis in 
budding yeast. Here we identified the conserved F-BAR protein Hof1 as a 
substrate of the MEN kinase complex Dbf2-Mob1 during cytokinesis. We show that 
polo-like kinase Cdc5 first phosphorylates Hof1 to allow subsequent 
phosphorylation by Dbf2-Mob1. This releases Hof1 from the septin ring and 
facilitates Hof1 binding to the medial actomyosin ring (AMR), where Hof1 
promotes AMR contraction and membrane ingression. Domain structure analysis 
established that the central, unstructured, region of Hof1, named the ring 
localization sequence (RLS), is sufficient to mediate Hof1's binding to the 
medial ring in a cell cycle-dependent manner. Genetic and functional data 
support a model in which Dbf2-Mob1 regulates Hof1 by inducing domain 
rearrangements, leading to the exposure of the Hof1 RLS domain during telophase.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.622411
PMCID: PMC3078711
PMID: 21498574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Spatial and timely coordination of cytokinesis is crucial for the maintenance of organelle inheritance and genome integrity. The mitotic exit network (MEN) pathway controls both the timely initiation of mitotic exit and cytokinesis in budding yeast. Here we identified the conserved F-BAR protein Hof1 as a substrate of the MEN kinase complex Dbf2–Mob1 during cytokinesis. We show that polo-like kinase Cdc5 first phosphorylates Hof1 to allow subsequent phosphorylation by Dbf2–Mob1. This releases Hof1 from the septin ring and facilitates Hof1 binding to the medial actomyosin ring (AMR), where Hof1 promotes AMR contraction and membrane ingression. Domain structure analysis established that the central, unstructured, region of Hof1, named the ring localization sequence (RLS), is sufficient to mediate Hof1's binding to the medial ring in a cell cycle-dependent manner. Genetic and functional data support a model in which Dbf2–Mob1 regulates Hof1 by inducing domain rearrangements, leading to the exposure of the Hof1 RLS domain during telophase.

Discussion

The conserved F-BAR protein Hof1 plays an essential role in the regulation of cytokinesis in budding yeast. Here, we investigated the regulation of Hof1 during mitosis and report that three different mitotic kinases phosphorylate Hof1 to regulate its relocalization from septins to the medial AMR to promote cytokinesis: Cdk1, the polo-like kinase Cdc5, and the MEN kinase complex Dbf2–Mob1.

Strains, plasmids, growth conditions, and genetic methods

Yeast strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in Supplemental Tables S2 and S3. Yeast growth conditions and media were as described ( Sherman 1991 ). Gene deletions and epitope tagging were performed using PCR-based methods ( Knop et al. 1999 ; Janke et al. 2004 ). Yeast strains were grown in yeast peptone dextrose medium containing 0.1 mg/L adenine (YPAD). Instead of dextrose, either 3% raffinose (YPAR) or a mixture of 3% raffinose and 2% galactose (YPARG) was used in experiments involving expression of genes under control of the Gal1 promoter. Synthetic complete (SC) media lacking corresponding amino acids were used to grow strains carrying plasmids. Loss of URA3 -containing plasmids was tested using plates containing 1 mg/mL 5-fluoroorotic acid (5-FOA). To test the viability of double mutants, we used a plasmid shuffle strategy. Briefly, mutants strains containing the corresponding wild-type gene on URA3 -based plasmid were analyzed for growth on 5-FOA plates (select against URA3 ). At least six individual transformants were analyzed per double mutant, and one representative mutant is shown.

Protein methods

Yeast protein extracts and Western blotting were performed as described ( Janke et al. 2004 ). Antibodies were rabbit anti-GFP antibody, mouse anti-tubulin (Tub1), mouse anti-HA (clone 12CA5, Sigma), rabbit anti-Clb2, and guinea pig anti-Sic1 ( Maekawa et al. 2007 ). The peptide-based rabbit anti-Hof1-S424-P antibody was raised in rabbits using the peptide NQSLSS(p)PSESSSS, in which (p) denotes the phosphorylated serine (Peptide Specialty Laboratories GmbH). Anti-Hof1-S424-P antibodies were purified from the preabsorbed sera by affinity purification using the immobilized phophopeptide. Secondary antibodies were goat anti-mouse, goat anti-rabbit, and goat anti-guinea pig IgGs coupled to horseradish peroxidase (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories).
