---
pmid: '25733668'
title: Shu1 is a cell-surface protein involved in iron acquisition from heme in Schizosaccharomyces
  pombe.
authors:
- Mourer T
- Jacques JF
- Brault A
- Bisaillon M
- Labbé S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4400333
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.642058
---

# Shu1 is a cell-surface protein involved in iron acquisition from heme in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
**Authors:** Mourer T, Jacques JF, Brault A, Bisaillon M, Labbé S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M115.642058](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M115.642058)
**PMC:** [PMC4400333](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4400333/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Apr 17;290(16):10176-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.642058. Epub 
2015 Mar 2.

Shu1 is a cell-surface protein involved in iron acquisition from heme in 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Mourer T(1), Jacques JF(1), Brault A(1), Bisaillon M(1), Labbé S(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Département de Biochimie, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la 
Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec J1E 4K8, Canada.
(2)From the Département de Biochimie, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la 
Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec J1E 4K8, Canada 
Simon.Labbe@USherbrooke.ca.

Iron is an essential metal cofactor that is required for many biological 
processes. Eukaryotic cells have consequently developed different strategies for 
its acquisition. Until now, Schizosaccharomyces pombe was known to use reductive 
iron uptake and siderophore-bound iron transport to scavenge iron from the 
environment. Here, we report the identification of a gene designated shu1(+) 
that encodes a protein that enables S. pombe to take up extracellular heme for 
cell growth. When iron levels are low, the transcription of shu1(+) is induced, 
although its expression is repressed when iron levels rise. The iron-dependent 
down-regulation of shu1(+) requires the GATA-type transcriptional repressor 
Fep1, which strongly associates with a proximal promoter region of shu1(+) in 
vivo in response to iron repletion. HA4-tagged Shu1 localizes to the plasma 
membrane in cells expressing a functional shu1(+)-HA4 allele. When heme 
biosynthesis is selectively blocked in mutated S. pombe cells, their ability to 
acquire exogenous hemin or the fluorescent heme analog zinc mesoporphyrin IX is 
dependent on the expression of Shu1. Further analysis by absorbance spectroscopy 
and hemin-agarose pulldown assays showed that Shu1 interacts with hemin, with a 
KD of ∼2.2 μm. Taken together, results reported here revealed that S. pombe 
possesses an unexpected pathway for heme assimilation, which may also serve as a 
source of iron for cell growth.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.642058
PMCID: PMC4400333
PMID: 25733668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Iron is an essential metal cofactor that is required for many biological processes. Eukaryotic cells have consequently developed different strategies for its acquisition. Until now, Schizosaccharomyces pombe was known to use reductive iron uptake and siderophore-bound iron transport to scavenge iron from the environment. Here, we report the identification of a gene designated shu1 + that encodes a protein that enables S. pombe to take up extracellular heme for cell growth. When iron levels are low, the transcription of shu1 + is induced, although its expression is repressed when iron levels rise. The iron-dependent down-regulation of shu1 + requires the GATA-type transcriptional repressor Fep1, which strongly associates with a proximal promoter region of shu1 + in vivo in response to iron repletion. HA 4 -tagged Shu1 localizes to the plasma membrane in cells expressing a functional shu1 + -HA 4 allele. When heme biosynthesis is selectively blocked in mutated S. pombe cells, their ability to acquire exogenous hemin or the fluorescent heme analog zinc mesoporphyrin IX is dependent on the expression of Shu1. Further analysis by absorbance spectroscopy and hemin-agarose pulldown assays showed that Shu1 interacts with hemin, with a K D of ∼2.2 μ m . Taken together, results reported here revealed that S. pombe possesses an unexpected pathway for heme assimilation, which may also serve as a source of iron for cell growth.

Introduction

Eukaryotic cells are committed to acquire iron because it is an essential component of the active center of several proteins that are associated with fundamental processes ( 1 – 3 ). Iron is generally found in forms that are biologically unavailable; therefore, organisms have developed diverse strategies to scavenge it from their environment. Although two strategies, namely reductive iron uptake and siderophore-bound iron transport, have been mostly studied in fungi, heme is known to be an important source of iron. However, cellular components that are required for heme assimilation and iron acquisition from heme are still poorly understood ( 4 , 5 ). One reason may be the fact that Saccharomyces cerevisiae , one of the most widely adopted yeast, is unable to transport exogenous heme with high affinity ( 6 ).

Heme is constituted of a protoporphyrin IX structure in which one atom of iron is coordinated by the imidazole rings ( 7 ). Typically, heme serves as a prosthetic group for many enzymes that are intimately linked to essential cellular functions such as respiration, antioxidative protection, and synthesis and degradation of several metabolites ( 8 ). Heme biosynthesis and heme uptake are part of two different means to acquire heme in several organisms. Heme biosynthesis has been extensively studied ( 7 ). It involves eight enzymes that are located either in mitochondria or the cytoplasm, depending where their specific action occurs along the biosynthetic pathway. In Schizosaccharomyces pombe , these eight enzymes are respectively encoded by the following genes: hem1 + , hem2 + , hem3 + , ups1 + , hem12 + , hem13 + , hem14 + , and hem15 + . Hem1 (or δ-aminolevulinate acid synthase) catalyzes the biosynthesis of δ-aminolevulinate (ALA) 2 from succinyl-CoA and glycine. ALA is then used by a second enzyme (Hem2 or porphobilinogen synthase) of the biosynthetic pathway toward heme biosynthesis (involving six additional steps). In the absence of Hem1, biosynthesis of heme is blocked. The hem1 Δ deletion is lethal for S. pombe ( 9 ), unless exogenous ALA is provided, allowing heme biosynthesis from step 2 to proceed. An additional way to maintain hem1 Δ cells alive is to add exogenous hemin (heme chloride), thereby fostering cells to use their heme uptake system. The hem1 Δ mutant strain can thus be used to selectively block heme biosynthesis by controlling growth medium composition (absence of ALA), thereby allowing the possibility of investigating the mechanism of exogenous heme acquisition.

A number of fungal proteins containing a common in fungal extracellular membrane (CFEM) domain have been reported to bind heme and facilitate its transport ( 10 – 12 ). A canonical eight-Cys-containing CFEM domain corresponds to P X C(A/G) X 2 CX 8 -12 C X 1–3 ( X /T)D X 2–5 C X Cx 9–14 C X 3–4 C X 15–16 C (where X is any amino acid residue). In Candida albicans , two CFEM proteins, Rbt5 and Rbt51 (also denoted Pga10), have been shown to bind hemin and hemoglobin ( 13 ). However, only deletion of RBT5 ( rbt5 Δ) (not rbt51 Δ) affects heme-iron acquisition, indicating that Rbt5 plays a major role for C. albicans growth in the presence of hemin as a sole source of iron. In contrast, growth defect due to the absence of Rbt5 could be restored by adding increasing concentrations of hemin (or hemoglobin), suggesting the existence of additional cellular components or mechanism(s) for acquisition of heme ( 14 ). Genome sequence of C. albicans has revealed other genes encoding CFEM-related proteins, including Pga7, Csa1, Csa2, and Ssr1. In the case of Pga7, its inactivation causes a greater growth defect phenotype than an rbt5 Δ mutant in the presence of hemin or hemoglobin as a sole iron source ( 14 ). Although Pga7 exhibits a higher affinity for hemin than Rbt5, hemin can be transferred from one protein to the other ( 14 ). Pga7 and Rbt5 localize at the cell surface. However, they show distinct properties with respect to their attachment within the cell wall or cell membrane, with Rbt5 being more exposed at the cell surface than Pga7. Interestingly, as opposed to Rbt5 inactivation, the loss of Pga7 attenuates virulence of C. albicans in a mouse model of systemic infection ( 14 ). Besides the cell-surface glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins Rbt5 and Pga7, additional C. albicans proteins are involved in exogenous heme acquisition. These proteins include heme oxygenase Hmx1 ( 15 , 16 ), vacuolar ATPase Vma11, and proteins of the ESCRT ( e ndosomal s orting c omplex r equired for t ransport) system that may be involved in heme trafficking to the vacuole for processing and its utilization as a source of iron ( 17 ). However, the mechanism responsible for heme internalization by heme-responsive GPI-anchored proteins remains unclear because of their obvious lack of a cytoplasmic domain. Furthermore, their connection with the ESCRT system and an endocytic pathway to transport cargo to the vacuole remains unclear.

Other yeasts such as Candida parapsilosis and Paracoccidioides brasiliensis use Rbt5-like proteins to acquire heme ( 18 , 19 ). In the case of Cryptococcus neoformans , the extracellular heme-binding glycoprotein Cig1 is required for exogenous heme uptake ( 20 ). cig1 Δ mutant cells consistently exhibit delayed growth when heme is the sole source of iron. However, Cig1 is not a member of the CFEM family of proteins because it lacks the typical canonical eight-Cys-containing CFEM domain found in other members of this family. Nevertheless, downstream cellular components of Cig1 that participate in heme uptake may be common to those found in C. albicans because Vps23, a component of the C. neoformans ESCRT system, is also required for heme acquisition ( 21 ).

Two pathways of iron acquisition have so far been identified in S. pombe ( 22 ). The first pathway consists of a ferrireductase and a ferroxidase-permease complex for high affinity elemental iron uptake ( 23 ). The ferrireductase Frp1 reduces Fe 3+ to Fe 2+ ions prior to uptake through transport by the Fio1-Fip1 heteromeric complex. The second pathway consists of the production and uptake of siderophores. The siderophore synthetase Sib1 and l -ornithine N 5 -oxygenase Sib2 participate in ferrichrome synthesis, whereas Str1, Str2, and Str3 are known or predicted to function as siderophore-iron transporters ( 24 – 26 ). A common hallmark of frp1 + , fio1 + , fip1 + , sib1 + , sib2 + , str1 + , str2 + , and str3 + genes is the fact that they are regulated at the transcriptional level as a function of iron availability. Their expression is induced under conditions of iron starvation, whereas repression of these genes occurs under iron-replete conditions. The iron-dependent repression of frp1 + , fio1 + , fip1 + , sib1 + , sib2 + , str1 + , str2 + , and str3 + transcription relies on the presence of the GATA-type transcriptional repressor Fep1 ( 24 , 25 , 27 ). Once activated under conditions of elevated iron, Fep1 binds to chromatin-containing DNA sequences known as GATA elements (5′-(A/T)GATA(A/T)-3′), which are found in the promoters of its target genes. Conversely, when iron levels are low, Fep1 fails to bind chromatin and that results in strong activation of transcription of genes encoding iron uptake proteins ( 28 ).

Genome-wide studies have identified a gene ( SPAC1F8.02c ), denoted shu1 + , whose transcript is induced or repressed as a function of iron depletion or repletion ( 29 , 30 ). Here, we show that iron-mediated repression of shu1 + transcription required GATA-type elements and a functional fep1 + gene. Using a shu1 + -HA 4 allele that retained wild-type function, microscopic analyses revealed that HA 4 -tagged Shu1 is localized at the plasma membrane when iron levels are low. When a hem1 Δ shu1 Δ mutant strain was incubated in the absence of ALA and in the presence of hemin, cells were unable to grow unless an untagged shu1 + or HA 4 -tagged shu1 + allele was re-integrated and expressed in this mutant strain. This result revealed that Shu1 allowed the hem1 Δ shu1 Δ mutant to regain its capacity to acquire hemin. As expected, cells expressing Shu1 were able to take up zinc mesoporphyrin IX (ZnMP), a heme analog. Results showed that Shu1 binds to hemin-agarose and exhibits an equilibrium dissociation constant ( K D ) value of ∼2.2 μ m for hemin. Taken together, these results led to the interpretation that Shu1 supports iron acquisition from extracellular heme under low iron conditions.

DISCUSSION

Heme and hemoglobin represent an important source of iron in mammals. Heme is also essential for growth of pathogenic fungi such as C. albicans , C. parapsilosis, and C. neoformans , which have evolved mechanisms to acquire iron from this source ( 12 ). In the cases of C. albicans and C. parapsilosis , a group of proteins involved in this process are members of the CFEM family ( 14 , 18 ). These CFEM proteins are thought to be anchored to the cell wall or attached to the plasma membrane of fungal cells through putative GPI structures. Expression of CFEM2 , CFEM3 , CFEM4, and CFEM6 in C. parapsilosis as well as RBT5 , RBT51, and PGA7 in C. albicans is transcriptionally induced under low iron conditions ( 14 , 18 ). In C. albicans , the proposed model involves at least two CFEM-type proteins, Rbt5 and Pga7. These two proteins act as heme receptors and cooperate in a protein-protein relay mechanism, which presumably promotes an internalization event of heme via endocytosis. Once internalized, heme is degraded by an intracellular heme oxygenase or is delivered by way of an as yet undefined endocytic pathway into vacuoles for storage or processing ( 14 , 17 ). It has been proposed that the role of CFEM proteins in iron acquisition from heme is likely to be conserved between C. albicans and C. parapsilosis ( 18 ). In C. neoformans , the extracellular glycoprotein Cig1 binds heme and supports iron acquisition from this prosthetic compound (iron-protoporphyrin) ( 20 ). Analogous to RBT5 / 51 and PGA7 genes in C. albicans , transcript levels of CIG1 are strongly induced under conditions of iron starvation ( 44 , 45 ). However, unlike Rbt5/51 and Pga7 proteins, Cig1 does not contain a CFEM domain or any known conserved heme-binding motif ( 20 ). Therefore, its property as a hemophore remains to be established.

In this study, S. pombe shu1 + transcript levels were induced in iron-starved cells. These observations were reminiscent of the iron-dependent transcriptional regulation of RBT5/51 , PGA7 , CFEM2/3/4/6, and CIG1 genes involved in heme-iron acquisition in C. albicans , C. parapsilosis, and C. neoformans , respectively. Conversely, in cells undergoing transition from low to high iron, shu1 + gene expression was repressed by the iron sensor Fep1. The fact that Fep1 was required for iron-dependent repression of shu1 + suggested that cellular handling of iron and heme was closely interconnected, reinforcing the concept that exogenous heme provides an iron source for S. pombe cells. The existence of a gene in S. pombe that encodes a cell-surface heme-binding protein raises an intriguing question with respect to the advantage for S. pombe to be able to take up iron from heme as this yeast is not a pathogenic fungus for humans or warm-blooded organisms. S. pombe was originally isolated from East African millet beer, but subsequent natural strains have been found in various alcoholic beverages, cultivated fruits such as apples and grapes, and leaves used to produce tea ( 46 – 48 ). Although the natural ecology of S. pombe is not well understood, it is possible that yeast strains can pick up unbound prosthetic groups from degraded hemoproteins, which are released from decomposed organic matter. Laboratory S. pombe strains are almost all derivatives of strains 968, 972, and 975 that were isolated from an over-sulfurized sample of French wine ( 49 ). This finding suggests that these strains had been in contact with vining leaves and plants, which can liberate iron-porphyrin complexes (or heme-based molecules) following death and rupture of plant cells and the degradation of cellular hemoproteins. Direct heme uptake systems have been identified in other microorganisms that are not obligate microbes for animals. For instance, several marine bacteria have been found to be able to acquire exogenous heme from their environment such as lysed phytoplankton ( 50 ). It would be of interest to study a collection of S. pombe isolates to determine whether the pathway of heme-iron acquisition is conserved in relationship to their ability to grow in various environments.

Based on results reported here, S. pombe should be considered to have three distinct systems for iron acquisition. The first system takes up reduced iron through a heteroprotein complex that consists of the ferroxidase Fio1 and the permease Fip1. The second system mediates the uptake of siderophore-bound iron through siderophore-specific transporters, including Str1 and Str2. The third system mediates Shu1-dependent iron assimilation from exogenous heme. Upon addition of the iron chelator Dip (250 μ m ), we observed that mRNA levels of fio1 + (or fip1 + ) and str1 + were rapidly induced within 30 min of treatment ( 38 ). 3 This step was followed by a sustained induction of fio1 + and str1 + mRNA levels for at least 4 h. In the case of shu1 + , under the same conditions, mRNA levels were detected at later times, being detected only 90 min after treatment. After 4 h of iron starvation-dependent induction, shu1 + mRNA levels were at their maximum levels. 3 This observation suggests a temporal regulation of S. pombe iron acquisition systems, reflecting a source-dependent iron preference among distinct uptake systems that would favor transport of iron according to the following sequence: free iron ions, siderophore-bound chelates, and then heme. Although the pathway for heme acquisition in S. pombe remains to be elucidated, its activity is independent of the Fio1/Fip1 oxidase-permease complex because a hem1 Δ fip1 Δ fio1 Δ mutant strain was able to grow at the same level as hem1 Δ cells 3 in the absence of ALA and in the presence of hemin as the sole source of iron.

Examination of global gene expression by DNA microarray analysis has shown that, under low iron conditions, hem3 + and ups1 + expression was decreased 3.2- and 1.7-fold, respectively, compared with the basal levels observed in a wild-type strain ( 30 ). hem3 + and ups1 + encode the third (hydroxymethylbilane synthase) and fourth (uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase) enzyme of the heme biosynthetic pathway, respectively. This finding reveals that iron deprivation negatively regulates heme biosynthesis. To counterbalance this response, fission yeast induces the expression of shu1 + , which participates in transport of exogenous heme from the environment. Consistent with the iron starvation-mediated repression of the Hem3/Ups1 pathway, the inactivation of Fep1 under iron starvation resulted in the induction of the Shu1-mediated action. Increased Shu1 activity would therefore favor heme acquisition from the environment and would complement the loss of heme production inherent to the Php4-dependent repression of the Hem3/Ups1 pathway.

Microscopic and biochemical analyses have revealed that functional HA 4 -tagged Shu1 localized to the plasma membrane when iron levels are low. After enzymatic digestion of the cell wall, Shu1 was still located at the plasma membrane. Shu1 is predicted to contain a GPI anchor, which would serve to attach it to the cell membrane. In the case of Rbt5, its localization has been reported in plasma membrane and in the cell wall ( 13 , 14 ). Although the localization of Pga7 is less defined, its cellular distribution suggests that the protein may be located more internally when compared with Rbt5 ( 14 ). Cellular location of Cig1 or CFEM2, -3, -4, or- 6 has not yet been reported. Although Shu1 contains seven Cys residues (positions 72, 87, 92, 101, 130, 172, and 214), their arrangement does not correspond to that of P X C(A/G) X 2 C X 8–12 C X 1–3 ( X /T)D X 2–5 C X C X 9–14 C X 3–4 C X 15–16 C that is found in the canonical eight-Cys-containing CFEM domains ( 10 ). However, four of these Cys residues (positions 72, 87, 92, and 101) exhibit an arrangement reminiscent of a partial CFEM domain, with a C X 14 C X 4 CX 8 C configuration in Shu1 as compared with a C X 11 C X 4 C X 15 C configuration in Rbt5/51 or Pga7. When these four Cys residues were mutated in Shu1 (Shu1-C72A/C87A/C92A/C101A), hem1 Δ shu1 Δ cells expressing the shu1-C72A/C87A/C92A/C101A allele were unable to grow in the absence of ALA and in the presence of hemin as a sole source of iron. This defect was not due to protein mislocalization because results showed that the HA 4 -tagged Shu1-C72A/C87A/C92A/C101A localized to the cell surface in a manner similar to that of wild-type protein. Pulldown assays using protein lysates prepared from cells expressing Shu1-C72A/C87A/C92A/C101A showed that substitutions of the four Cys residues strongly decreased Shu1 binding to hemin-agarose. Furthermore, this mutant did not possess significant ability to bind heme when subjected to absorbance spectroscopy. These results suggested that these Cys residues, or at least some of them, participate in heme coordination in Shu1. However, definition of their respective contribution will require structural studies of the hemoprotein.

It has been suggested that Rbt5 mediates heme endocytosis in C. albicans , which subsequently allowed heme to be delivered to the vacuole ( 17 ). Once in vacuoles, heme would undergo further degradation, resulting in the release of iron from protoporphyrin IX. This series of events would constitute a specialized pathway and make the vacuole an important site for intracellular iron stores. S. pombe is one of the yeast species that does not have heme oxygenase, thereby leaving open the possibility for the existence of an endocytic pathway for iron acquisition from heme (as reported in C. albicans ). Future studies are required to determine the nature of the mechanisms by which Shu1 and potential partners operate with respect to heme assimilation as well as its utilization as a source of iron.
