---
pmid: '19946888'
title: Defining the membrane proteome of NK cells.
authors:
- Ghosh D
- Lippert D
- Krokhin O
- Cortens JP
- Wilkins JA
journal: J Mass Spectrom
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/jms.1696
---

# Defining the membrane proteome of NK cells.
**Authors:** Ghosh D, Lippert D, Krokhin O, Cortens JP, Wilkins JA
**Journal:** J Mass Spectrom (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jms.1696](https://doi.org/10.1002/jms.1696)

## Abstract

1. J Mass Spectrom. 2010 Jan;45(1):1-25. doi: 10.1002/jms.1696.

Defining the membrane proteome of NK cells.

Ghosh D(1), Lippert D, Krokhin O, Cortens JP, Wilkins JA.

Author information:
(1)Manitoba Centre for Proteomics and Systems Biology, Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, R3E 3P4 Canada.

The present study was initiated to define the composition of the membrane 
proteome of the Natural Killer (NK) like cell line YTS. Isolated membranes were 
treated with reagents that have been reported to remove peripheral membrane 
proteins. Additional steps involving trifluoroethanol (TFE) were introduced in 
an effort to remove remaining nonintegral membrane proteins. This treatment 
resulted in the release of a subset of proteins without any apparent disruption 
of membrane integrity. The membranes were solubilized and digested with trypsin 
in 25% TFE. The resulting peptides were separated using an off-line 
two-dimensional reversed phase LC technique at alkaline and acidic pHs. Mass 
spectrometric analysis identified 1843 proteins with high confidence scores. On 
the basis of the presence of transmembrane regions or evidence of 
posttranslational modifications and prediction algorithms, approximately 40% of 
the identified proteins were predicted as plausible membrane proteins. The 
remaining species were largely involved in cellular processes and molecular 
functions that could be predicted to be transiently associated with membranes. 
The analytical approaches presented in this study offer robust generic methods 
for the identification and characterization of membrane proteins. These 
observations highlight the fact that the membrane is a dynamic entity that is 
composed of integral and stably associated proteins.

Copyright 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jms.1696
PMID: 19946888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
