---
pmid: '14702309'
title: Complete sequence and evolutionary genomic analysis of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa
  transposable bacteriophage D3112.
authors:
- Wang PW
- Chu L
- Guttman DS
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC305741
doi: 10.1128/JB.186.2.400-410.2004
---

# Complete sequence and evolutionary genomic analysis of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa transposable bacteriophage D3112.
**Authors:** Wang PW, Chu L, Guttman DS
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.186.2.400-410.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.186.2.400-410.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC305741](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC305741/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 2004 Jan;186(2):400-10. doi: 10.1128/JB.186.2.400-410.2004.

Complete sequence and evolutionary genomic analysis of the Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa transposable bacteriophage D3112.

Wang PW(1), Chu L, Guttman DS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S3B2 Canada.

Bacteriophage D3112 represents one of two distinct groups of transposable phage 
found in the clinically relevant, opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa. 
To further our understanding of transposable phage in P. aeruginosa, we have 
sequenced the complete genome of D3112. The genome is 37,611 bp, with an overall 
G+C content of 65%. We have identified 53 potential open reading frames, 
including three genes (the c repressor gene and early genes A and B) that have 
been previously characterized and sequenced. The organization of the putative 
coding regions corresponds to published genetic and transcriptional maps and is 
very similar to that of enterobacteriophage Mu. In contrast, the International 
Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses has classified D3112 as a lambda-like phage on 
the basis of its morphology. Similarity-based analyses identified 27 open 
reading frames with significant matches to proteins in the NCBI databases. 
Forty-eight percent of these were similar to Mu-like phage and prophage 
sequences, including proteins responsible for transposition, transcriptional 
regulation, virion morphogenesis, and capsid formation. The tail proteins were 
highly similar to prophage sequences in Escherichia coli and phage Phi12 from 
Staphylococcus aureus, while proteins at the right end were highly similar to 
proteins in Xylella fastidiosa. We performed phylogenetic analyses to understand 
the evolutionary relationships of D3112 with respect to Mu-like versus 
lambda-like bacteriophages. Different results were obtained from 
similarity-based versus phylogenetic analyses in some instances. Overall, our 
findings reveal a highly mosaic structure and suggest that extensive horizontal 
exchange of genetic material played an important role in the evolution of D3112.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.186.2.400-410.2004
PMCID: PMC305741
PMID: 14702309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Bacteriophage D3112 represents one of two distinct groups of transposable phage found in the clinically relevant, opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa . To further our understanding of transposable phage in P. aeruginosa , we have sequenced the complete genome of D3112. The genome is 37,611 bp, with an overall G+C content of 65%. We have identified 53 potential open reading frames, including three genes (the c repressor gene and early genes A and B) that have been previously characterized and sequenced. The organization of the putative coding regions corresponds to published genetic and transcriptional maps and is very similar to that of enterobacteriophage Mu. In contrast, the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses has classified D3112 as a λ-like phage on the basis of its morphology. Similarity-based analyses identified 27 open reading frames with significant matches to proteins in the NCBI databases. Forty-eight percent of these were similar to Mu-like phage and prophage sequences, including proteins responsible for transposition, transcriptional regulation, virion morphogenesis, and capsid formation. The tail proteins were highly similar to prophage sequences in Escherichia coli and phage Phi12 from Staphylococcus aureus , while proteins at the right end were highly similar to proteins in Xylella fastidiosa . We performed phylogenetic analyses to understand the evolutionary relationships of D3112 with respect to Mu-like versus λ-like bacteriophages. Different results were obtained from similarity-based versus phylogenetic analyses in some instances. Overall, our findings reveal a highly mosaic structure and suggest that extensive horizontal exchange of genetic material played an important role in the evolution of D3112.

DISCUSSION

Phage D3112 was characterized by BLASTP local similarity search and phylogenetic analyses. Our results are consistent with previous studies that revealed that the genomic organization of D3112 is similar to Mu, while its morphology is similar to λ ( 11 ). The majority of ORFs in the early, middle, and late head regions possess amino acid similarity to, and reflect the organization of, Mu-like prophages from N. meningitidis Z2491. These same conclusions are also reflected in our phylogenetic studies. Since these regions comprise the majority of the D3112 backbone, we hypothesize that they are the most-ancestral part of the genome, suggesting that D3112 may have evolved from a phage which originally infected N. meningitidis . The level of nucleotide sequence divergence was so high that reliable sequence alignments could only be made at the protein level. This divergence may have been due to host adaptation, an idea supported by the similar G+C contents of D3112 and its host P. aeruginosa . An exception is ORF 1, which has an unusually low G+C content of 56%, suggesting a more recent horizontal origin. BLASTP analysis shows that ORF 1 is most similar to a homologous protein in P. aeruginosa phage D3 ( 29 ), but our phylogenetic analysis of ORF 1 and its G+C content strongly support a more recent common ancestry with N. meningitidis (G+C content, 51.8%) or S. oneidensis (G+C content, 46.0%), as shown in Fig. 2 and 3A .

The tail segment (ORFs 42 and 43) constitutes a diverse set of proteins believed to be responsible for recognition of host cell surface receptors and, thus, host range ( 47 ). The tail components of Mu and Mu-like prophages PNM1 and FluMu show strong similarity to each other ( 34 , 36 ) but differ substantially from D3112. This divergence could be responsible for the differences in host specificity of D3112, with D3112-like phages infecting the Pseudomonadaceae . Interestingly, while BLASTP analyses found the D3112 tail proteins to have the highest similarity to enteric prophage sequences, the more thorough phylogenetic analyses clearly place the D3112 tail proteins in a clade with proteins from Pseudomonas species, as seen in Fig. 2 and 3B . Due to the high similarity between the D3112 tail proteins and prophage sequences in E. coli O157:H7, one can speculate that the genes encoding these proteins originated in E. coli , were transferred into a Pseudomonas phage, and then diversified as the phage adapted to new Pseudomonas hosts. Given the limited knowledge about the existing diversity of transposable phage, horizontal transfer from a third party cannot be ruled out.

The proteins at the right end of the D3112 genome are strikingly similar to hypothetical proteins found in X. fastidiosa , suggesting the recent acquisition of this region from X. fastidiosa . Pieces of host DNA are more easily copackaged with the right end of the phage, accounting for the presence of up to 2 kb of heterogeneous host DNA present in our sequences. Sometimes the proteins encoded in the packaged host DNA can provide adaptive functions for the phage that are not necessary for its life cycle, such as conferring species specificity, enhancing virulence, affecting phage gene expression, or modulating host responses ( 23 , 27 , 36 , 49 , 55 ). In this case the relevant sequences can become a permanent part of the phage genome, as hypothesized for the X. fastidiosa -like sequences at the right end of the D3112 genome.

Interspersed around the D3112 genome are stretches of sequence that are similar to those from disparate phages, further illuminating the mosaic nature of the phage. The vast majority of these segments appear to have been acquired via horizontal gene transfer between D3112 and other phages with bacterial hosts belonging to the phylum Proteobacteria . These observations suggest that the rate or likelihood of transmission of genetic material via horizontal transfer may be correlated with the relatedness of the host species. In the case of homologous recombination, limits to horizontal gene transfer due to genetic distance have been observed in bacteria ( 42 ). Restriction of horizontal gene transfer by their host's species boundaries has also been observed in dairy phage ( 13 ).

A more thorough sampling of phage sequences will be needed before we understand the global diversity and evolution of transposable phage. One aspect of phage genomics that has received considerable attention is the development of criteria for taxonomic classification ( 32 , 43 ). Recent attempts at viral taxonomy have used a range of methods, including the conservation of morphological structures and the comparison of whole viral genome structure, organization, and similarity ( 7 , 17 , 43 ). There are an ever-growing number of examples of incongruence between the morphology-based taxonomic classification systems and sequence-based systems. Sequence similarity-based taxonomy, the basis of phage comparative genomics, has been seen as a powerful and promising alternative ( 13 , 14 , 17 , 39 ). Yet, our analyses clearly demonstrate that the results of local similarity-based analyses (e.g., BLASTP searches) and evolutionary (phylogenetic) analyses do not necessarily agree. Comparisons of these two methods for our 17 analyzed D3112 ORFs found that only 65% of the ORFs showed complete agreement between the similarity-based and phylogenetic approaches or at least placed the ORF of interest in a clade with multiple taxa, one of which also displayed the highest similarity. The remaining 35% of the ORFs (ORFs 1, 11, 26, 31, 36, and 43) showed significant inconsistencies between the most similar sequence identified by BLASTP and the closely related sequences identified by phylogenetic analyses. Figure 3 presents two representative examples of this similarity and phylogenetic inconsistency.

Why do the conclusions from similarity-based analyses differ from those drawn from phylogenetic analyses? We do not believe that the inconsistencies can be attributed to failings of the phylogenetic methods. We took the conservative analytical approach of trimming regions of questionable homology out of the multiple sequence alignments and performing the phylogenetic analyses by two independent methods (neighbor-joining and Bayesian analyses). The differences are most likely due to the inherent limitations of the BLAST algorithm. BLAST is a pairwise local alignment algorithm which excels at rapidly identifying sequences of local similarity from a sea of unrelated sequence. This is clearly an extremely powerful method for identifying matches to a query sequence in a large database, but the obvious drawback of this algorithm from the perspective of phage taxonomy is it preferentially identifies relatively short regions of high similarity, such as that seen between conserved domains, over regions of global similarity. Since BLAST uses pairwise comparisons, it is also unable to identify clusters of related sequences, such as multiple isolates from the same species. This may be a problem if one member of this cluster of related sequences is substantially more related to the query sequence than the average of the cluster (Fig. 4 ). Lastly, similarity analyses provide no basis for distinguishing homology from homoplasy (identity due to parallel or convergent evolution). Consequently, evolutionary inferences drawn from similarity-based approaches must be evaluated carefully.

Phylogenetic analyses, on the other hand, are built upon multiple sequence alignments. We used ClustalX, a global sequence alignment algorithm, which assumes that sequences are similar over their entire length and tries to align them from end to end (with end gaps allowed). Multiple sequence alignments are built progressively upon a guide tree, thereby avoiding biases inherent in the pairwise local alignment. The danger with global alignments is seen if certain regions of the alignment are very poorly conserved, or not homologous. These problems can be addressed by judicious trimming of the sequence to remove unalignable regions. Finally, phylogenetic methods are vastly superior in dealing with homoplasy.

The current trend towards using sequence data to resolve viral taxonomical issues has raised the question of identifying the most-appropriate level for analysis. There are four levels of resolution that can be used for the analysis of genomes. The first is the comparison of whole phage genomes, such as in the study of lambdoid and dairy phages ( 14 , 17 , 24 , 26 ). The second entails the use of smaller segments of phage genomes, such as the structural segment containing the head and tail genes ( 17 ). The third is the level of an individual gene or ORF. The fourth is at the level of conserved motifs within genes. Lawrence et al. ( 32 ) discuss the problems associated with mosaicism of viral genomes and how these invalidate approaches based on strictly pairwise local alignments for the first two levels of comparison. One exception to this conclusion is the work with the dairy phages, because they constitute an unusually homogeneous group of phages that display significant similarity at the nucleotide level ( 13 ). Similarity-based analyses at the level of a gene or smaller are biased by the tendency to align conserved motifs. Based on our results with D3112, we propose that phylogenetic analyses should be performed at the level of individual genes, since these represent the functional units of these highly mosaic systems. Phylogenetic approaches are clearly superior to approaches based on similarity and local alignments. They are less prone to be biased by conserved motifs and use more of the evolutionary information of a sequence, thereby permitting more power to disentangle homology from homoplasy.

There is ongoing debate as to whether there exists a single gene which can be used to build viral phylogenies ( 32 , 39 ). We argue that the evolutionary history of a phage should be reflected in the distinct phylogenies of all of its individual genes. Thus, building a multigenic phylogenetic framework for each phage moves us away from the failings of phenetic approaches (morphological, structural, or sequence similarity) towards a cladistic basis for viral taxonomy. Lawrence et al. ( 32 ) have addressed related issues and proposed similar guidelines for a viral taxonomy. These gene-by-gene phylogenetic methods more realistically reflect the relationships between phages by taking into account the mosaic nature of these important organisms.
