---
pmid: '17244609'
title: Dynamic regulation of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator by
  competitive interactions of molecular adaptors.
authors:
- Lee JH
- Richter W
- Namkung W
- Kim KH
- Kim E
- Conti M
- Lee MG
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC11410141
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M610857200
---

# Dynamic regulation of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator by competitive interactions of molecular adaptors.
**Authors:** Lee JH, Richter W, Namkung W, Kim KH, Kim E, Conti M, Lee MG
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M610857200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M610857200)
**PMC:** [PMC11410141](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11410141/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Apr 6;282(14):10414-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M610857200. Epub
2007  Jan 23.

Dynamic regulation of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator by 
competitive interactions of molecular adaptors.

Lee JH(1), Richter W, Namkung W, Kim KH, Kim E, Conti M, Lee MG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Gastroenterology, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Korea.

Disorganized ion transport caused by hypo- or hyperfunctioning of the cystic 
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) can be detrimental and may 
result in life-threatening diseases such as cystic fibrosis or secretory 
diarrhea. Thus, CFTR is controlled by elaborate positive and negative 
regulations for an efficient homeostasis. It has been shown that expression and 
activity of CFTR can be regulated either positively or negatively by PDZ 
(PSD-95/discs large/ZO-1) domain-based adaptors. Although a positive regulation 
by PDZ domain-based adaptors such as EBP50/NHERF1 is established, the mechanisms 
for negative regulation of the CFTR by Shank2, as well as the effects of 
multiple adaptor interactions, are not known. Here we demonstrate a physical and 
physiological competition between EBP50-CFTR and Shank2-CFTR associations and 
the dynamic regulation of CFTR activity by these positive and negative 
interactions using the surface plasmon resonance assays and consecutive patch 
clamp experiments. Furthermore whereas EBP50 recruits a cAMP-dependent protein 
kinase (PKA) complex to CFTR, Shank2 was found to be physically and functionally 
associated with the cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase PDE4D that precludes 
cAMP/PKA signals in epithelial cells and mouse brains. These findings strongly 
suggest that balanced interactions between the membrane transporter and multiple 
PDZ-based adaptors play a critical role in the homeostatic regulation of 
epithelial transport and possibly the membrane transport in other tissues.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M610857200
PMID: 17244609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Clinicians and researchers are exploring safer and novel treatment strategies for treating the ever-prevalent Parkinson’s disease (PD) across the globe. Several therapeutic strategies are used clinically for PD, including dopamine replacement therapy, DA agonists, MAO-B blockers, COMT blockers, and anticholinergics. Surgical interventions such as pallidotomy, particularly deep brain stimulation (DBS), are also employed. However, they only provide temporal and symptomatic relief. Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) is one of the secondary messengers involved in dopaminergic neurotransmission. Phosphodiesterase (PDE) regulates cAMP and cGMP intracellular levels. PDE enzymes are subdivided into families and subtypes which are expressed throughout the human body. PDE4 isoenzyme- PDE4B subtype is overexpressed in the substantia nigra of the brain. Various studies have implicated multiple cAMP-mediated signaling cascades in PD, and PDE4 is a common link that can emerge as a neuroprotective and/or disease-modifying target. Furthermore, a mechanistic understanding of the PDE4 subtypes has provided perceptivity into the molecular mechanisms underlying the adverse effects of phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors (PDE4Is). The repositioning and development of efficacious PDE4Is for PD have gained much attention. This review critically assesses the existing literature on PDE4 and its expression. Specifically, this review provides insights into the interrelated neurological cAMP-mediated signaling cascades involving PDE4s and the potential role of PDE4Is in PD. In addition, we discuss existing challenges and possible strategies for overcoming them.

Introduction

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a movement disorder that primarily affects the geriatric population, 15 out of 100,000 individuals are affected worldwide annually (Tysnes and Storstein 2017 ). Postural instability is a significant symptom, along with other moderate-to-milder motor symptoms such as akinesia, bradykinesia, tremor, and rigidity (Kalia and Lang 2015 ; Moustafa et al. 2016 ). Various non-motor abnormalities such as apathy, anhedonia, depression, cognitive dysfunction, sleep problems, and hallucinosis are also diagnostic of PD (Poewe 2008 ). Degradation of neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) is majorly characterized in PD, which culminates in striatal dopamine depletion and intracellular deposition of alpha-synuclein (α-synuclein). At the molecular level, several pathways and processes are involved in the pathogenesis of PD, including α-synuclein protein homeostasis, mitochondrial dysfunction, calcium homeostasis, oxidative stress, axoplasmic flow, and neuroinflammation (Poewe et al. 2017 ). Current anti-parkinsonian drug treatment options include dopamine replacement therapy, dopamine (DA) agonists, monoamine oxidase-B (MAO-B) blockers, catechol-O-methyl-transferase (COMT) blockers, and anticholinergics. Other treatments include surgical interventions such as pallidotomy, especially of the internal globus pallidus which is a deep brain stimulation (DBS) or subthalamic nucleus in the subthalamus, and stem cell transplant surgery (Yuan et al. 2010 ). However, no anti-parkinsonian therapy can arrest disease progression, whether administered alone or in combination. Hence, developing disease-modifying and neuroprotective agents is essential to halt PD. Currently, various strategies are being investigated for the treatment of PD. The inhibition of cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase (PDE) enzymes is one such approach (Martinez and Gil 2013 ; Nthenge-Ngumbau and Mohanakumar 2018 ; Erro et al. 2021 ). Hydrolysis of 3’ cyclic nucleotides, namely, cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) are catalyzed by these enzymes and regulate their intracellular levels. Hence, the overexpression of PDEs in PD decreases intracellular cAMP levels and consequently affects dopamine receptor signaling. This is because dopamine receptors use cAMP, a second messenger, to transmit signals to effector proteins. PDEs are a superfamily of enzymes and 11 PDE isoenzymes have been identified, with PDE4 being the most abundant and widely expressed in the central nervous system (CNS) (Lakics et al. 2010 ; Gavaldà and Roberts 2013 ).

PDE4 isoenzymes have been targeted to alleviate the pathophysiological causes of several neurological disorders and neurodegenerative diseases (Kumar and Singh 2017 ; Sims et al. 2017 ; Kinoshita et al. 2017 ; Xu et al. 2019 ). In the present day, PDE4 inhibition has received increasing attention, and numerous Phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors (PDE4Is) have been investigated in neurological and neurodegenerative experimental models and clinical trials (Prickaerts et al. 2017 ; Blokland et al. 2019a ). By extensively analyzing and assessing the existing studies on the overall characteristics and expression of PDE4, its role in the multiple interrelated cAMP-mediated signaling pathways that contribute to PD pathophysiology, and a summary of investigational PDE4Is in PD as well as challenges and their overcome strategies; this review explores the prospect of inhibiting PDE4 isoenzyme as a potential disease-modifying target for PD.

Conclusion

In this review, based on preclinical studies and one clinical study, we suggest that overexpression of PDE4 may be associated with neurodegeneration and EDS in PD. Contrary to these findings, one study showed that decreased PDE4 expression is associated with cognitive impairment in patients with PD. Given the important role of PDE4 overexpression in the pathogenesis of PD at the preclinical level and the limited clinical studies on patients, a clear conclusion cannot be drawn or accepted from these few studies. Additionally, the PET clinical study using rolipram did not specify the enantiomers used as rolipram enantiomers have different affinities towards PDE4. Moreover, these studies included patients with idiopathic PD. Therefore, in future studies, these issues should be addressed when studying the correlation between PD and PDE4 expression.

Interestingly, based on numerous preclinical studies and outcomes, we have discussed several signaling pathways and molecules implicated in PD that could possibly be contributed by PDE4. These pathways crosslink and can be mediated by cAMP levels, which are regulated by PDE cyclo nucleotide enzymes. Furthermore, in the healthy human brain, the expression of PDE4, specifically PDE4B, is highest in the SNpc, which is cAMP-specific. Thus, PDE4 might be a driving enzyme that regulates most cAMP-mediated signaling in the brain, and its dysregulation has been shown to contribute to the progression of PD. When PDE4Is are studied to halt PD progression, cAMP-mediated signaling pathways and the expression of their associated molecules are often modulated. This suggests that PDE4 is highly correlated with cAMP-mediated signaling in the brain and its inhibition may exert neuroprotective and/or disease-modifying effects in PD. Moreover, preclinical studies with several PDE4 inhibitors have mitigated PD hallmarks such as α-synuclein aggregation and dopaminergic degeneration. Therefore, PDE4 inhibition is an attractive strategy for PD treatment. However, clinical studies on PDE4 inhibition in PD remain inconclusive.

Most PDE4Is are non-specific to PDE4 subtypes, limiting their use owing to adverse effects that lead to failure of drugs such as rolipram in clinical trials for other disease conditions. However, the mechanisms underlying the adverse effects of targeting PDE4 and its subtypes highlight the importance of allosteric modulation, PDE4 subtype-specific inhibition, and specific drug delivery. In addition, we discuss developmental strategies, such as the generation of rapidly degraded PDE4Is, combination therapy, and inhibitor–antibody conjugates, which may also be beneficial in overcoming adverse effects. Specific PDE4BIs and PDE4DIs have been found to decrease the incidence of adverse effects and to potentiate their activity more effectively and therapeutically. Moreover, implementing various drug delivery strategies for PDE4Is may help achieve brain-targeted delivery, increase oral bioavailability, and decrease peripheral exposure, thus minimizing adverse effects in the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases such as PD. In addition, structure-based optimization techniques using scaffolds with desired physicochemical properties may be used to develop new potent PDE4Is with high therapeutic value and reduced adverse effects. Based on the findings reported in this review, we conclude that PDE4 inhibition may emerge as a potential therapeutic strategy for PD. Research in this field, with more emphasis on the clinical aspect, can elucidate the therapeutic value of new and promising PDE4Is in PD.
