---
pmid: '16585534'
title: Senescence marker protein 30 functions as gluconolactonase in L-ascorbic acid
  biosynthesis, and its knockout mice are prone to scurvy.
authors:
- Kondo Y
- Inai Y
- Sato Y
- Handa S
- Kubo S
- Shimokado K
- Goto S
- Nishikimi M
- Maruyama N
- Ishigami A
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2006'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1458640
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0511225103
---

# Senescence marker protein 30 functions as gluconolactonase in L-ascorbic acid biosynthesis, and its knockout mice are prone to scurvy.
**Authors:** Kondo Y, Inai Y, Sato Y, Handa S, Kubo S, Shimokado K, Goto S, Nishikimi M, Maruyama N, Ishigami A
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0511225103](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0511225103)
**PMC:** [PMC1458640](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1458640/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Apr 11;103(15):5723-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0511225103. Epub 2006 Apr 3.

Senescence marker protein 30 functions as gluconolactonase in L-ascorbic acid 
biosynthesis, and its knockout mice are prone to scurvy.

Kondo Y(1), Inai Y, Sato Y, Handa S, Kubo S, Shimokado K, Goto S, Nishikimi M, 
Maruyama N, Ishigami A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of 
Gerontology, Tokyo 173-0015, Japan.

We originally identified senescence marker protein 30 (SMP30) as a distinctive 
protein whose expression decreases in an androgen-independent manner with aging. 
Here, we report its sequence homology found in two kinds of bacterial 
gluconolactonases (GNLs) by using the blast search. Then, through a biochemical 
study, we identify SMP30 as the lactone-hydrolyzing enzyme GNL of animal 
species. SMP30 purified from the rat liver had lactonase activity toward various 
aldonolactones, such as d- and l-glucono-delta-lactone, d- and 
l-gulono-gamma-lactone, and d- and l-galactono-gamma-lactone, with a requirement 
for Zn(2+) or Mn(2+) as a cofactor. Furthermore, in SMP30 knockout mice, no GNL 
activity was detectable in the liver. Thus, we conclude that SMP30 is a unique 
GNL in the liver. The lactonase reaction with l-gulono-gamma-lactone is the 
penultimate step in l-ascorbic acid (AA) biosynthesis, and the essential role of 
SMP30 in this synthetic process was verified here by a nutritional study using 
SMP30 knockout mice. These knockout mice (n = 6), fed a vitamin C-deficient 
diet, did not thrive; i.e., they displayed symptoms of scurvy such as bone 
fracture and rachitic rosary and then died by 135 days after the start of 
receiving the deficient diet. The AA levels in their livers and kidneys at the 
time of death were <1.6% of those in WT control mice. In addition, by using the 
SMP30 knockout mouse, we demonstrate that the alternative pathway of AA 
synthesis involving d-glucurono-gamma-lactone operates in vivo, although its 
flux is fairly small.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0511225103
PMCID: PMC1458640
PMID: 16585534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts 
declared.

## Full Text

Abstract

We originally identified senescence marker protein 30 (SMP30) as a distinctive protein whose expression decreases in an androgen-independent manner with aging. Here, we report its sequence homology found in two kinds of bacterial gluconolactonases (GNLs) by using the blast search. Then, through a biochemical study, we identify SMP30 as the lactone-hydrolyzing enzyme GNL of animal species. SMP30 purified from the rat liver had lactonase activity toward various aldonolactones, such as d - and l -glucono-δ-lactone, d - and l -gulono-γ-lactone, and d - and l -galactono-γ-lactone, with a requirement for Zn 2+ or Mn 2+ as a cofactor. Furthermore, in SMP30 knockout mice, no GNL activity was detectable in the liver. Thus, we conclude that SMP30 is a unique GNL in the liver. The lactonase reaction with l -gulono-γ-lactone is the penultimate step in l -ascorbic acid (AA) biosynthesis, and the essential role of SMP30 in this synthetic process was verified here by a nutritional study using SMP30 knockout mice. These knockout mice ( n = 6), fed a vitamin C-deficient diet, did not thrive; i.e., they displayed symptoms of scurvy such as bone fracture and rachitic rosary and then died by 135 days after the start of receiving the deficient diet. The AA levels in their livers and kidneys at the time of death were <1.6% of those in WT control mice. In addition, by using the SMP30 knockout mouse, we demonstrate that the alternative pathway of AA synthesis involving d -glucurono-γ-lactone operates in vivo , although its flux is fairly small.

Discussion

This study provides unequivocal evidence that SMP30 is the bona fide GNL in the AA biosynthetic pathway of mammals. In support, ( i ) SMP30 purified from the rat liver exhibited GNL activity (Fig. 7 and Table 2), ( ii ) a partial amino acid sequence of GNL purified from rat liver was identical to that of the reported sequence of rat SMP30, and ( iii ) the GNL was recognized by antibody directed to rat SMP30. Moreover, recombinant rat SMP30 expressed in E. coli showed GNL activity ( Fig. 2 ). Overall, the purified SMP30 had the same substrate specificity toward multiple lactones as previously reported for GNL ( 7 , 11 , 13 , 14 ). With respect to the requirement for metal in this process, Zn 2+ and Mn 2+ were both effective activators, although it was previously reported that Mn 2+ was dominantly effective but that Zn 2+ had no effect. This discrepancy is possibly due to differing experimental settings ( 11 , 13 , 14 ).

Measurements of GNL activity disclosed that the liver extract of SMP30 knockout mice lacked any such activity under conditions in which the WT extract was markedly active for three known substrates of GNL ( Table 1 ). This outcome indicates that SMP30 is the unique lactone-hydrolyzing enzyme for these substrates in the liver. An essential role of SMP30 in AA biosynthesis in mice was evidenced by a nutritional study using SMP30 knockout mice. AA is produced from the ultimate hexose precursor d -glucose, and, in this pathway, l -gulonic acid, an intermediary metabolite of the uronic acid cycle, is lactonized to form l -gulono-γ-lactone, which in turn is oxidized to AA ( Fig. 6 A ). GNL is known to catalyze the former reaction ( 8 – 10 ). In our experiments, scurvy developed in SMP30 knockout mice that were fed a vitamin C-deficient diet ( Figs. 3 and 4 ). Their symptoms of scurvy included bone fractures, rachitic rosaries, and premature death by 135 days after institution of the vitamin C-deficient diet. In view of this fact, one can understand the phenotypes of SMP30 knockout mice mentioned in the Introduction (abnormally low body weight, shortened life span, susceptibility to hepatic apoptosis, etc., compared with WT mice). For our previous studies ( 2 – 4 ), these mice were fed autoclaved mouse chow, which we now know contains too little vitamin C to maintain normal levels of AA in tissues ( Fig. 4 ). Accumulations of triglycerides, phospholipids, and cholesterol in the livers of these knockout mice may be associated with impaired fatty acid oxidation, probably because of decreased synthesis of carnitine, which plays a role in the transport of long-chain fatty acids into mitochondria. AA is required as a cofactor in two hydroxylation reactions in carnitine biosynthesis ( 15 ). In fact, AA-deficient guinea pigs were shown to have abnormalities of lipid metabolism, such as hyperlipidemia and hypercholesterolemia ( 16 ). Another clinical feature of young SMP30 knockout mice is enlargement of alveolar airspaces compared with those of WT mice ( 2 ). A similar change was reported in ODS (osteogenic disorder Shionogi) rats that survived for a long time on a vitamin C-deficient diet ( 17 ). However, never before did we observe scurvy symptoms in the knockout mice that were fed autoclaved mouse chow, despite their smaller body size and shorter life span ( 3 , 4 ). Assuming that an average weight of mice is 25 g and that the amount of chow taken per day is 4 g ( 18 ), SMP30 knockout mice ingest <0.01 mg/g of body weight per day. Based on the observation that 0.02 mg/g of body weight per day cannot sustain normal body function in a scurvy-prone mouse whose l -gulono-γ-lactone oxidase gene was deleted ( 19 ), the SMP30 knockout mice seem not to have ingested enough vitamin C. Probably, a small amount of AA may be synthesized through the alternative pathway ( Fig. 6 A ) previously proposed based on an enzymatic study ( 20 ) and demonstrated here in SMP30 knockout mice. Furthermore, the absence of GNL may lead to decreased degradation of AA, because GNL can hydrolyze the lactone ring of dehydroascorbic acid, the oxidation product of AA, to 2,3-dioxo- l -gulonic acid, as formerly reported ( 20 ).

Because SMP30 is abundant in the kidney and also present, although in lesser amounts, in other organs ( 21 ), this protein must have some function other than AA synthesis, which does not occur at all these sites. SMP30 may prevent the production of glycated proteins by hydrolyzing d -glucono-δ-lactone. It is possible that this lactone is formed from d -glucose by glucose dehydrogenase in vivo , and it may be involved in glycation of proteins. In fact, human and rat hemoglobin was shown to be glycated with d -glucono-δ-lactone ( 22 ). Glycated proteins, especially advanced glycation end products, are known to cause the deterioration of cellular functions; therefore, SMP30 may protect cells from such an effect.
