---
pmid: '18211570'
title: Emerging strategies to treat chronic immune thrombocytopenic purpura.
authors:
- Newland A
journal: Eur J Haematol Suppl
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2007.01001.x
---

# Emerging strategies to treat chronic immune thrombocytopenic purpura.
**Authors:** Newland A
**Journal:** Eur J Haematol Suppl (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0609.2007.01001.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0609.2007.01001.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Haematol Suppl. 2008 Feb;(69):27-33. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0609.2007.01001.x.

Emerging strategies to treat chronic immune thrombocytopenic purpura.

Newland A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematology, The Royal London Hospital, London, UK. 
a.c.newland@qmul.ac.uk

Immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) is a fairly common hematological disorder 
and is a minor disease for many affected patients; most are in good health, and 
many can tolerate low platelet counts without the need for treatment. For the 
majority of patients who do undergo treatment, first-line therapies, including 
corticosteroids, are effective in increasing platelet counts, although long-term 
use can be associated with adverse effects. Second-line therapies, such as 
immunosuppressants, have been largely untested in controlled studies of ITP 
patients. Like first-line therapies, splenectomy is effective for many patients; 
however, it is frequently avoided by physicians who prefer the use of 
alternative drug therapies due to concerns about safety risks and is often 
declined by patients reluctant to undergo surgery. Thus, approaches to avoid or 
defer the use of splenectomy have been actively pursued. An anti-CD20 antibody, 
rituximab, can limit the production of autoantibodies, but reactivated viral 
infections have been reported with its use. Agents that directly stimulate 
platelet production, such as thrombopoietin (TPO) receptor-binding agents, have 
shown promise in clinical trials of ITP patients as well as in hepatitis C 
virus-infected individuals with thrombocytopenia. Two TPO receptor agonists in 
advanced clinical development--eltrombopag and AMG 531--are discussed here. Both 
eltrombopag and AMG 531 appear to be effective in raising platelet counts and 
both have been well tolerated in clinical trials to date. However, potential 
safety issues with thrombopoietic growth factors include thrombocytosis, rebound 
thrombocytopenia, and increased bone marrow fibrosis. Further testing will 
determine which safety issues--if any--are of clinical concern.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2007.01001.x
PMID: 18211570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
