---
pmid: '9746354'
title: Modified glycosylation of cellobiohydrolase I from a high cellulase-producing
  mutant strain of Trichoderma reesei.
authors:
- Harrison MJ
- Nouwens AS
- Jardine DR
- Zachara NE
- Gooley AA
- Nevalainen H
- Packer NH
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.1998.2560119.x
---

# Modified glycosylation of cellobiohydrolase I from a high cellulase-producing mutant strain of Trichoderma reesei.
**Authors:** Harrison MJ, Nouwens AS, Jardine DR, Zachara NE, Gooley AA, Nevalainen H, Packer NH
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1432-1327.1998.2560119.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1432-1327.1998.2560119.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 1998 Aug 15;256(1):119-27. doi: 
10.1046/j.1432-1327.1998.2560119.x.

Modified glycosylation of cellobiohydrolase I from a high cellulase-producing 
mutant strain of Trichoderma reesei.

Harrison MJ(1), Nouwens AS, Jardine DR, Zachara NE, Gooley AA, Nevalainen H, 
Packer NH.

Author information:
(1)Macquarie University Centre for Analytical Biotechnology, School of 
Biological Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia.

Cellobiohydrolase I is an industrially important exocellulase secreted in high 
yields by the filamentous fungus Trichoderma reesei. The nature and effect of 
glycosylation of CBHI and other cellulolytic enzymes is largely unknown, 
although many other structural and mechanistic aspects of cellulolytic enzymes 
are well characterised. Using a combination of liquid chromatography, 
electrospray mass spectrometry, solid-phase Edman degradation, and 
monosaccharide analysis we have identified every site of glycosylation of CBHI 
from a high cellulase-producing mutant strain of T. reesei, ALKO2877, and 
characterised each site in terms of its modifying carbohydrate and site-specific 
heterogeneity. The catalytic core domain comprises three N-linked glycans which 
each consist of a single N-acetylglucosamine residue. Within the glycopeptide 
linker domain, all eight threonines are variably glycosylated with between at 
least one, and up to three, mannose residues per site. All serines in this 
domain are at least partially glycosylated with a single mannose residue. This 
linker region has also been shown to be sulfated by a combination of ion 
chromatography and collision-induced dissociation electrospray mass 
spectrometry. The sulfate is probably mannose-linked. The biological 
significance of N-linked single N-acetylglucosamine in the catalytic core, and 
mannose sulfation in the linker region, is not known.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.1998.2560119.x
PMID: 9746354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
