---
pmid: '16762840'
title: Swi6/HP1 recruits a JmjC domain protein to facilitate transcription of heterochromatic
  repeats.
authors:
- Zofall M
- Grewal SI
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2006.05.010
---

# Swi6/HP1 recruits a JmjC domain protein to facilitate transcription of heterochromatic repeats.
**Authors:** Zofall M, Grewal SI
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2006.05.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2006.05.010)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2006 Jun 9;22(5):681-92. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2006.05.010.

Swi6/HP1 recruits a JmjC domain protein to facilitate transcription of 
heterochromatic repeats.

Zofall M(1), Grewal SI.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, National Cancer Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2006 Jun 23;22(6):709-710. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2006.06.004.

Heterochromatin formation is generally thought to result in transcriptional 
repression of target loci. However, RNAi-mediated heterochromatin assembly 
requires RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcription. The mechanism facilitating 
Pol II accessibility to heterochromatin is unknown. We show that the fission 
yeast Epe1, a JmjC domain-containing protein and a negative regulator of 
heterochromatin, is distributed across all major heterochromatic domains and at 
certain meiotic genes. Remarkably, Epe1 is recruited to heterochromatic loci by 
the heterochromatin protein Swi6/HP1. Moreover, Epe1 acts in a 
heterochromatin-specific context to promote Pol II accessibility by 
counteracting repressive chromatin. This requires Epe1's JmjC domain, although 
the mechanism utilized might be distinct from other JmjC proteins that possess 
known demethylase activities. We also find that Epe1 is preferentially recruited 
to inverted repeats flanking centromeres to restrain the spread of 
pericentromeric heterochromatin. Our analyses suggest that Swi6/HP1 recruits 
opposing chromatin-modifying activities, the balancing of which is crucial for 
heterochromatin maintenance.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2006.05.010
PMID: 16762840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
