---
pmid: '9535918'
title: Heteromerization of the gammac chain with the interleukin-9 receptor alpha
  subunit leads to STAT activation and prevention of apoptosis.
authors:
- Bauer JH
- Liu KD
- You Y
- Lai SY
- Goldsmith MA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.15.9255
---

# Heteromerization of the gammac chain with the interleukin-9 receptor alpha subunit leads to STAT activation and prevention of apoptosis.
**Authors:** Bauer JH, Liu KD, You Y, Lai SY, Goldsmith MA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.15.9255](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.15.9255)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 10;273(15):9255-60. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.15.9255.

Heteromerization of the gammac chain with the interleukin-9 receptor alpha 
subunit leads to STAT activation and prevention of apoptosis.

Bauer JH(1), Liu KD, You Y, Lai SY, Goldsmith MA.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biochemistry, Free University Berlin, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Interleukin-9 (IL-9) is a cytokine with pleiotropic effects on mast cell and T 
cell lines. It exerts its effects through the IL-9R complex consisting of 
IL-9Ralpha and the common gammac subunit. Here we report functional evidence for 
receptor heteromerization for efficient signal transduction, and we define 
minimal requirements in the two receptor subunits for IL-9R function. Tyrosine 
336 of the IL-9Ralpha and the membrane-proximal segment of gammac are both 
crucial for signaling. The activated IL-9R complex employs the Janus kinases 
JAK1 and JAK3 for subsequent activation of the signal transducer and activator 
transcription (STAT) factors STAT-1, STAT-3, and STAT-5. This process is 
independent of Tyk2. We demonstrate further that the activated STAT complexes 
consist of STAT-1 and STAT-5 homodimers and STAT-1-STAT-3 heterodimers. Finally, 
we show that IL-9R signaling in a T cell line does not result in detectable 
mitogen-activated protein kinase activation and leads to unsustained 
proliferation. Nonetheless, these T cells are efficiently protected from 
dexamethasone-induced apoptosis. These results further define the molecular 
architecture of the IL-9R and its specific connections to various biologic 
responses.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.15.9255
PMID: 9535918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
