---
pmid: '19628690'
title: The BRC repeats of human BRCA2 differentially regulate RAD51 binding on single-
  versus double-stranded DNA to stimulate strand exchange.
authors:
- Shivji MK
- Mukund SR
- Rajendra E
- Chen S
- Short JM
- Savill J
- Klenerman D
- Venkitaraman AR
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2714763
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0906208106
---

# The BRC repeats of human BRCA2 differentially regulate RAD51 binding on single- versus double-stranded DNA to stimulate strand exchange.
**Authors:** Shivji MK, Mukund SR, Rajendra E, Chen S, Short JM, Savill J, Klenerman D, Venkitaraman AR
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0906208106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0906208106)
**PMC:** [PMC2714763](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2714763/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 11;106(32):13254-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0906208106. Epub 2009 Jul 23.

The BRC repeats of human BRCA2 differentially regulate RAD51 binding on single- 
versus double-stranded DNA to stimulate strand exchange.

Shivji MK(1), Mukund SR, Rajendra E, Chen S, Short JM, Savill J, Klenerman D, 
Venkitaraman AR.

Author information:
(1)The Medical Research Council Cancer Cell Unit, Hutchison/MRC Research Centre, 
Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XZ,United Kingdom.

The breast and ovarian cancer suppressor BRCA2 controls the enzyme RAD51 during 
homologous DNA recombination (HDR) to preserve genome stability. BRCA2 binds to 
RAD51 through 8 conserved BRC repeat motifs dispersed in an 1127-residue region 
(BRCA2([BRC1-8])). Here, we show that BRCA2([BRC1-8]) exerts opposing effects on 
the binding of RAD51 to single-stranded (ss) versus double-stranded (ds) DNA 
substrates, enhancing strand exchange. BRCA2([BRC1-8]) alters the 
electrophoretic mobility of RAD51 bound to an ssDNA substrate, accompanied by an 
increase in ssDNA-bound protein assemblies, revealed by electron microscopy. 
Single-molecule fluorescence spectroscopy shows that BRCA2([BRC1-8]) promotes 
RAD51 loading onto ssDNA. In contrast, BRCA2([BRC1-8]) has a different effect on 
RAD51 assembly on dsDNA; it suppresses and slows this process. When homologous 
ssDNA and dsDNA are both present, BRCA2([BRC1-8]) stimulates strand exchange, 
with delayed RAD51 loading onto dsDNA accompanying the appearance of joint 
molecules representing recombination products. Collectively, our findings 
suggest that BRCA2([BRC1-8]) targets RAD51 to ssDNA while inhibiting dsDNA 
binding and that these contrasting activities together bolster one another to 
stimulate HDR. Our work provides fresh insight into the mechanism of HDR in 
humans, and its regulation by the BRCA2 tumor suppressor.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0906208106
PMCID: PMC2714763
PMID: 19628690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The editor and 
A.V. recently (March 2009) co-authored a paper on a related topic.

## Full Text

Abstract

The breast and ovarian cancer suppressor BRCA2 controls the enzyme RAD51 during homologous DNA recombination (HDR) to preserve genome stability. BRCA2 binds to RAD51 through 8 conserved BRC repeat motifs dispersed in an 1127-residue region (BRCA2 [BRC1–8] ). Here, we show that BRCA2 [BRC1–8] exerts opposing effects on the binding of RAD51 to single-stranded (ss) versus double-stranded (ds) DNA substrates, enhancing strand exchange. BRCA2 [BRC1–8] alters the electrophoretic mobility of RAD51 bound to an ssDNA substrate, accompanied by an increase in ssDNA-bound protein assemblies, revealed by electron microscopy. Single-molecule fluorescence spectroscopy shows that BRCA2 [BRC1–8] promotes RAD51 loading onto ssDNA. In contrast, BRCA2 [BRC1–8] has a different effect on RAD51 assembly on dsDNA; it suppresses and slows this process. When homologous ssDNA and dsDNA are both present, BRCA2 [BRC1–8] stimulates strand exchange, with delayed RAD51 loading onto dsDNA accompanying the appearance of joint molecules representing recombination products. Collectively, our findings suggest that BRCA2 [BRC1–8] targets RAD51 to ssDNA while inhibiting dsDNA binding and that these contrasting activities together bolster one another to stimulate HDR. Our work provides fresh insight into the mechanism of HDR in humans, and its regulation by the BRCA2 tumor suppressor.
