---
pmid: '14550570'
title: BRCA1 interacts with FHL2 and enhances FHL2 transactivation function.
authors:
- Yan J
- Zhu J
- Zhong H
- Lu Q
- Huang C
- Ye Q
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2003'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC5975090
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(03)00978-5
---

# BRCA1 interacts with FHL2 and enhances FHL2 transactivation function.
**Authors:** Yan J, Zhu J, Zhong H, Lu Q, Huang C, Ye Q
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(03)00978-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(03)00978-5)
**PMC:** [PMC5975090](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5975090/)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2003 Oct 9;553(1-2):183-9. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(03)00978-5.

BRCA1 interacts with FHL2 and enhances FHL2 transactivation function.

Yan J(1), Zhu J, Zhong H, Lu Q, Huang C, Ye Q.

Author information:
(1)Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, PR China.

Germ-line mutations in BRCA1 are associated with an increased lifetime risk of 
developing breast and/or ovarian tumors. The BRCA1 gene product is a 220-kDa 
protein that contains a tandem of two BRCA1 C-terminal (BRCT) domains required 
for transcription. In an attempt to understand how BRCA1 exerts its function 
through BRCT domains, we search for partners of the BRCT domains of BRCA1. Using 
the yeast two-hybrid system, we identified the four and a half LIM-only protein 
2 (FHL2) as a novel BRCA1 interacting protein. We demonstrate that BRCA1 and 
FHL2 can physically associate in vitro, in yeast, and in human cells. BRCA1 
interacted with FHL2 through its second BRCT domain and the interaction of FHL2 
with BRCA1 requires the last three LIM domains of FHL2. BRCA1 enhanced 
FHL2-mediated transcriptional activity in transient transfections. Tumor-derived 
transactivation-deficient BRCA1 mutants showed a reduced ability to enhance 
transactivation by FHL2. Lack of BRCA1 binding sites in the FHL2 completely 
abolished the FHL2 transactivation function. Reverse transcription polymerase 
chain reaction analysis showed that FHL2 mRNA levels may be downregulated in 
many breast cancer cell lines. These results suggest that the BRCA1-FHL2 
interaction may be involved in transcriptional regulation and play a significant 
role in cancer cell growth.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(03)00978-5
PMID: 14550570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

The Four-and-a-half LIM (FHL)-only protein subfamily belongs to the LIM-only protein family. The proteins within the group might originated by gene duplicate from a common ancestor and are sharing a high degree of homology all over their amino acid sequence ( Fimia et al., 2000 ). As indicated by its nomenclature, these proteins are signified by the presence of the four and a half cysteine-rich LIM homeodomain with the half-domain always located in the N-terminus ( Kurakula et al., 2015 ). The domain is generally having the consensus sequence CX2CX16–23HX2CX2CX2CX16–21CX2 (C/H/D) with X denotes any amino acid and is comprised of a double zinc finger motif ( Schmeichel and Beckerle, 1994 ). The name LIM was derived from the first letter of the transcription factors LIN-11, ISL-1 and MEC-3, from which the domain were originally characterized ( Way and Chalfie, 1988 ). However, the in vivo evidence that point towards the direct interactions of LIM domain and DNA is still elusive. Reports from different research groups suggested that LIM domain functions as a specific scaffold supporting the LIM-containing proteins to complex with diverse proteinaceous binding partners ( Schmeichel and Beckerle, 1994 ; Breen et al., 1998 ; Kadrmas and Beckerle, 2004 ; Frank et al., 2006 ). Thus far, five members have been categorized into the FHL subfamily, which are FHL1, FHL2, FHL3, FHL4 and activator of CREM in testis (ACT) in human ( Johannessen et al., 2006 ). FHL1, FHL2 and FHL3 are predominantly expressed in muscle, whereas FHL1 and FHL2 can also be found in tissues of different origins ( Samson et al., 2004 ). FHL4 and ACT are expressed exclusively in testis ( Morgan and Madgwick, 1999 ).

Conclusion

FHL2 expression levels vary greatly depending on the cancer type that the protein is expressed. For example, FHL2 transcript levels are strongly enhanced in patient samples derived from squamous carcinoma, glioblastoma, melanoma, chronic myelogenous leukaemia and cancers of the cervix, colon, lungs and kidneys. Low or undetectable FHL2 transcript levels can be observed in lymphoblastic leukaemia, promyelocytic leukaemia and Burkitt’s lymphoma cells. In this review, we focused on explaining such phenomena by examining the differential mechanistic regulations of FHL2 transcription in the various types of cancer. However, it is worth notice that the mutations of fhl2 and FHL2 posttranslational modifications may also contribute to cancinogenesis. In fact, an FHL2 mutation (Gly48Ser) with functional alterations has been identified in a patient with familial dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) in 2007. FHL2 can bind to the N2B and is2 regions of the metabolic enzyme titin/connectin, and the Gly48Ser mutation abrogates the interactions of FHL2 with the two proteins impairing the recruitment of titin/connectin to cardiac sarcomere which may lead to cardiac dysfunction and heart failure. ( Arimura et al., 2007 ). The case of cardiac dysfunction tempted us to question if fhl2 mutation may also profoundly affect the carcinogenesis of the different types of cancer, although not much records is available about the effects of FHL2 mutations on cancer progression. Posttranslational modification may alter FHL2 interactions with partners or its subcellular translocation ability. However, literatures demonstrate that FHL2 is interacting with mitogen-activated protein kinase ERK2 both in vitro and in vivo without phosphorylation ( Purcell et al., 2004 ). Muller et al also failed to detect FHL2 phosphorylation although the protein contains several potential phosphorylation sites and one O-glycosylation site ( El Mourabit et al., 2003 ). To date, the existence of posttranslational modifications other than phosphorylation that taken place on FHL2 such as ubiquitination, sumoylation, methylation and acetylation is still a mystery. Since, FHL2 exerts its functions almost exclusively through protein-protein interactions ( Fig. 3 ), research works in this direction would be of great importance.

Subcellular localization of FHL2 protein is also a field that deserves future investigation. FHL2 is present either predominantly in the nuclear or distributed uniformly in different cellular compartments. The expression patterns of FHL2 are dependent on the cell types that they are expressed, the differentiation stages, cancer progressive stages or responses to stimulation. The molecular mass of FHL2 is 32kDa which is well below the 50-kDa cut-off for transportation through nuclear pores ( Chan et al., 1998 ). FHL2 also interacts with many signal transduction proteins which belong to different functional classes including structural proteins, transcription factors, signal transducers, DNA replication and repair enzymes. Therefore, FHL2 translocation could play an important role in controlling signaling pathways and is inducible by using different biochemical or physical stimulating factors. Philip et al found that FHL2 could translocate into the nucleus by stimulating the Rho signaling pathway which leads eventually to aggressiveness and recurrence of prostate cancer ( Kahl et al., 2006 ). The translocation of FHL2 into the nucleus of NIH 3T3 cells after serum or ultraviolet light stimulation has also been reported. Inside the NIH 3T3 nucleus, FHL2 upregulate the expression and accumulation of the oncoproteins Fos and Jun in the nucleus which further elicit the expression of cyclin D1 ( Brown et al., 1998 ; Zheng and Zhao, 2007 ). Similar evidence has been identified in A7FIL+ cells, in which FHL2 shuttles from cytoskeleton into the nucleus upon lysophosphatidic acid stimulation ( McGrath et al., 2013 ). In sporadic colon cancer and human melanoma, FHL2 are highly expressed by peritumoral fibroblasts and melanoma cells respectively at the invasion front and are infrequently localized in the nuclear. TGF-β1 co-express with FHL2 in both cases, therefore, is believed to be one of the mediators of FHL2 nuclear translocation ( Gullotti et al., 2011 ; Westphal et al., 2015 ). Apparently, the pleiotropic functions of FHL2 as an adaptor protein may rely on its subcellular localization when traffic between nucleus and cytoplasm. However, the detailed molecular mechanisms and networks underpinning the FHL2 nuclear translocation process still need to be explored.

Taken together, the expression of FHL2 is regulated by a numbers of transcription factors. The protein itself also takes part in governing the expression of other genes by acting as an adaptor protein interacting with other transcription factors. The posttranslational modifications and mutations analysis of FHL2 appeared to be a valuable research niche, as findings may probably explain many questions concerning the molecular functioning of FHL2, e.g., the intricate machinery of the intracellular trafficking of FHL2. Since, FHL2 is highly related to cancer progression, in-depth investigation will provide insight for the search of novel pharmaceutical targets, as well as methods for the development of cancer interventions.
