---
pmid: '35271311'
title: 'OpenCell: Endogenous tagging for the cartography of human cellular organization.'
authors:
- Cho NH
- Cheveralls KC
- Brunner AD
- Kim K
- Michaelis AC
- Raghavan P
- Kobayashi H
- Savy L
- Li JY
- Canaj H
- Kim JYS
- Stewart EM
- Gnann C
- McCarthy F
- Cabrera JP
- Brunetti RM
- Chhun BB
- Dingle G
- Hein MY
- Huang B
- Mehta SB
- Weissman JS
- Gómez-Sjöberg R
- Itzhak DN
- Royer LA
- Mann M
- Leonetti MD
journal: Science
year: '2022'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC9119736
doi: 10.1126/science.abi6983
---

# OpenCell: Endogenous tagging for the cartography of human cellular organization.
**Authors:** Cho NH, Cheveralls KC, Brunner AD, Kim K, Michaelis AC, Raghavan P, Kobayashi H, Savy L, Li JY, Canaj H, Kim JYS, Stewart EM, Gnann C, McCarthy F, Cabrera JP, Brunetti RM, Chhun BB, Dingle G, Hein MY, Huang B, Mehta SB, Weissman JS, Gómez-Sjöberg R, Itzhak DN, Royer LA, Mann M, Leonetti MD
**Journal:** Science (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.abi6983](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abi6983)
**PMC:** [PMC9119736](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9119736/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2022 Mar 11;375(6585):eabi6983. doi: 10.1126/science.abi6983. Epub
2022  Mar 11.

OpenCell: Endogenous tagging for the cartography of human cellular organization.

Cho NH(#)(1), Cheveralls KC(#)(1), Brunner AD(#)(2), Kim K(#)(1), Michaelis 
AC(#)(2), Raghavan P(#)(1), Kobayashi H(1), Savy L(1), Li JY(1), Canaj H(1), Kim 
JYS(1), Stewart EM(1), Gnann C(1)(3), McCarthy F(1), Cabrera JP(1), Brunetti 
RM(4), Chhun BB(1), Dingle G(5), Hein MY(1), Huang B(1)(4)(6), Mehta SB(1), 
Weissman JS(7)(8), Gómez-Sjöberg R(1), Itzhak DN(1), Royer LA(1), Mann M(2)(9), 
Leonetti MD(1).

Author information:
(1)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 
Martinsried, Germany.
(3)Science for Life Laboratory, School of Engineering Sciences in Chemistry, 
Biotechnology and Health, KTH-Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(5)Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, Redwood City, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(7)Whitehead Institute, Koch Institute, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and 
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 
USA.
(8)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, 
San Francisco, CA, USA.
(9)NNF Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Science. 2022 Mar 11;375(6585):1093-1094. doi: 10.1126/science.abo2360.

Elucidating the wiring diagram of the human cell is a central goal of the 
postgenomic era. We combined genome engineering, confocal live-cell imaging, 
mass spectrometry, and data science to systematically map the localization and 
interactions of human proteins. Our approach provides a data-driven description 
of the molecular and spatial networks that organize the proteome. Unsupervised 
clustering of these networks delineates functional communities that facilitate 
biological discovery. We found that remarkably precise functional information 
can be derived from protein localization patterns, which often contain enough 
information to identify molecular interactions, and that RNA binding proteins 
form a specific subgroup defined by unique interaction and localization 
properties. Paired with a fully interactive website (opencell.czbiohub.org), our 
work constitutes a resource for the quantitative cartography of human cellular 
organization.

DOI: 10.1126/science.abi6983
PMCID: PMC9119736
PMID: 35271311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests. J.S.W. declares outside 
interest in Chroma Therapeutics, KSQ Therapeutics, Maze Therapeutics, Amgen, 
Tessera Therapeutics and 5 AM Ventures. M. M. is an indirect shareholder in 
EvoSep Biosystems.

## Full Text

Abstract

Elucidating the wiring diagram of the human cell is a central goal of the post-genomic era. We combined genome engineering, confocal live-cell imaging, mass spectrometry and data science to systematically map the localization and interactions of human proteins. Our approach provides a data-driven description of the molecular and spatial networks that organize the proteome. Unsupervised clustering of these networks delineates functional communities that facilitate biological discovery, and uncovers that RNA-binding proteins form a specific sub-group defined by unique interaction and localization properties. Furthermore, we discover that remarkably precise functional information can be derived from protein localization patterns, which often contain enough information to identify molecular interactions. Paired with a fully interactive website ( opencell.czbiohub.org ), we provide a resource for the quantitative cartography of human cellular organization.

Discussion

OpenCell combines three strategies to augment the description of human cellular architecture. First, we present an integrated experimental pipeline for high-throughput cell biology, fueled by scalable methods for genome engineering, live-cell microscopy and IP-MS. Second, we provide an open-source resource of well-curated localization and interactome measurements, easily accessible through an interactive web interface at opencell.czbiohub.org . And third, we developed an analytical framework for the representation and comparison of interaction or localization signatures (including a self-supervised machine learning approach for image encoding). Finally, we demonstrate how our dataset can be used both for fine-grained mechanistic exploration (to explore the function of multiple proteins that were previously uncharacterized), as well as for investigating the core organizational principles of the proteome.

Our current strategy that combines split-FPs and HEK293T – a cell line that is heavily transformed but easily manipulatable – is mostly constrained by scalability considerations. Excitingly, technological advances are quickly broadening the set of cellular systems that can be engineered and profiled at scale. Advances in stem cell technologies enable the generation of libraries that can be differentiated in multiple cell types ( 11 ), while innovations in genome engineering (for example, by modulating DNA repair ( 68 )) pave the way for the scalable insertion of gene-sized payload, for the combination of multiple edits in the same cell, or for increased homozygosity in polyclonal pools. In addition, recent developments in high-throughput light-sheet microscopy ( 69 ) might soon enable the systematic description of 4D intracellular dynamics ( 70 ).

A central feature of our approach is to use endogenous fluorescent tags to study protein function. Genome-edited cells enable to examine protein function at near-native expression levels (which can circumvent some limitations of over-expression ( 71 )), and to measure protein localization in live cells (which can avoid artefacts caused by fixation or antibody labeling ( 72 )). Comparing our data to the current reference datasets of protein-proteins interactions ( Fig. S4C – F ) or localization ( Fig. S7C – D ) highlights the performance of our strategy. In addition, our high success rate tagging essential genes ( Fig. S2A ; see also ( 73 ) in yeast) and the successful tagging of the near-complete yeast proteome ( 14 , 73 ) support that fluorescent tagging generally preserves normal protein physiology. However, limitations exist for specific protein targets. FPs are as big as an average human protein and their insertion can impair function or localization, for example by occluding important interaction interfaces or impairing sub-cellular targeting sequences. In other cases, tags can affect expression or degradation rates, which might explain why we find tagged proteins being expressed at 80% of their endogenous abundance, and 8% of targets in our dataset having outlier abundances at steady-state ( Fig. S3D ). Further, tagging often cannot discriminate between different isoforms of a protein (such as splicing or post-translationally modified variants). Finally, relying on endogenous expression can be an obstacle given the low concentration of most proteins in the human cell: even using a very bright FP like mNeonGreen ( 74 ), detecting proteins in the bottom 50% percentile of abundance is difficult ( Fig. S2D ). Solutions to this obstacle include using FP repeats to increase signal ( 18 , 23 ) or using tags that bind chemical fluorophores (e.g., HaloTag ( 75 )), which can be brighter than FPs or operate at wavelengths where cellular auto-fluorescence is decreased ( 76 ). Overall, the full description of human cellular architecture remains a formidable challenge which will require complementary methods being applied in parallel. The diversity of large-scale cell biology approaches is a solution to this problem ( 6 , 8 , 9 , 11 , 31 , 70 , 77 – 80 ). Mirroring the advances in genomics following the human genome sequence ( 2 ), open-source systematic datasets will likely play an important role in how the growth of cell biology measurements can be transformed into fundamental discoveries by an entire community ( 81 ).

In addition to presenting a resource of measurements and protocols, we also demonstrate how our data can be used to study the global signatures that pattern the proteome. Our analysis reveals that RNA-binding proteins, which form one of the biggest functional family in the cell, are characterized by a unique set of properties and segregate from other proteins in term of both interactions and spatial distribution. It would be fascinating to explore to which extent RNA itself might act as a structural organizer of the cellular proteome ( 62 , 82 ). This is for example the case for some non-coding RNAs whose main function is to template protein interactions to form nuclear bodies ( 83 ). High intrinsic disorder is one of the distinguishing features of RNA-BPs, which likely contributes to their unique properties. Beyond RNA-BPs, our data supports a general role for intrinsic disorder in shaping the spatial distribution of human proteins. For example, 13% of proteins in our dataset are found in spatial clusters that are significantly enriched for disordered proteins. This adds to the growing appreciation that intrinsic disorder, which is much more prevalent in eukaryotic vs. prokaryotic proteomes ( 84 , 85 ), plays a key role in the functional sub-compartmentalization of the eukaryotic nucleo- and cytoplasm in the context of biomolecular condensation ( 86 ).

Lastly, we show that the spatial distribution of each human protein is very specific, to the point that remarkably detailed functional relationships can be inferred on the sole basis of similarities between localization patterns – including the prediction of molecular interactions (which complements other studies ( 87 )). This highlights that intracellular organization is defined by fine-grained features that go beyond membership to a given organelle. Our demonstration that self-supervised deep learning models can identify complex but deterministic signatures from light microscopy images opens exciting avenues for the use of imaging as an information-rich method for deep phenotyping and functional genomics ( 51 ). Because light microscopy is easily scalable, can be performed live and enables measurements at the single-cell level, this should offer rich opportunities for the full quantitative description of cellular diversity in normal physiology and disease.
