---
pmid: '10094049'
title: The kinase TAK1 can activate the NIK-I kappaB as well as the MAP kinase cascade
  in the IL-1 signalling pathway.
authors:
- Ninomiya-Tsuji J
- Kishimoto K
- Hiyama A
- Inoue J
- Cao Z
- Matsumoto K
journal: Nature
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/18465
---

# The kinase TAK1 can activate the NIK-I kappaB as well as the MAP kinase cascade in the IL-1 signalling pathway.
**Authors:** Ninomiya-Tsuji J, Kishimoto K, Hiyama A, Inoue J, Cao Z, Matsumoto K
**Journal:** Nature (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/18465](https://doi.org/10.1038/18465)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1999 Mar 18;398(6724):252-6. doi: 10.1038/18465.

The kinase TAK1 can activate the NIK-I kappaB as well as the MAP kinase cascade 
in the IL-1 signalling pathway.

Ninomiya-Tsuji J(1), Kishimoto K, Hiyama A, Inoue J, Cao Z, Matsumoto K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya 
University, and CREST, Japan Science and Technology Corporation.

Interleukin-1 (IL-1) is a proinflammatory cytokine that has several effects in 
the inflammation process. When it binds to its cell-surface receptor, IL-1 
initiates a signalling cascade that leads to activation of the transcription 
factor NF-kappaB and is relayed through the protein TRAF6 and a succession of 
kinase enzymes, including NF-kappaB-inducing kinase (NIK) and I kappaB kinases 
(IKKs). However, the molecular mechanism by which NIK is activated is not 
understood. Here we show that the MAPKK kinase TAK1 acts upstream of NIK in the 
IL-1-activated signalling pathway and that TAK1 associates with TRAF6 during 
IL-1 signalling. Stimulation of TAK1 causes activation of NF-kappaB, which is 
blocked by dominant-negative mutants of NIK, and an inactive TAK1 mutant 
prevents activation of NF-kappaB that is mediated by IL-1 but not by NIK. 
Activated TAK1 phosphorylates NIK, which stimulates IKK-alpha activity. Our 
results indicate that TAK1 links TRAF6 to the NIK-IKK cascade in the IL-1 
signalling pathway.

DOI: 10.1038/18465
PMID: 10094049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
