---
pmid: '22094255'
title: Oxidative damage targets complexes containing DNA methyltransferases, SIRT1,
  and polycomb members to promoter CpG Islands.
authors:
- O'Hagan HM
- Wang W
- Sen S
- Destefano Shields C
- Lee SS
- Zhang YW
- Clements EG
- Cai Y
- Van Neste L
- Easwaran H
- Casero RA
- Sears CL
- Baylin SB
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC3220885
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.09.012
---

# Oxidative damage targets complexes containing DNA methyltransferases, SIRT1, and polycomb members to promoter CpG Islands.
**Authors:** O'Hagan HM, Wang W, Sen S, Destefano Shields C, Lee SS, Zhang YW, Clements EG, Cai Y, Van Neste L, Easwaran H, Casero RA, Sears CL, Baylin SB
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2011.09.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2011.09.012)
**PMC:** [PMC3220885](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3220885/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2011 Nov 15;20(5):606-19. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.09.012.

Oxidative damage targets complexes containing DNA methyltransferases, SIRT1, and 
polycomb members to promoter CpG Islands.

O'Hagan HM(1), Wang W, Sen S, Destefano Shields C, Lee SS, Zhang YW, Clements 
EG, Cai Y, Van Neste L, Easwaran H, Casero RA, Sears CL, Baylin SB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology and The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at 
Johns Hopkins, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 
21231, USA.

Comment in
    Epigenomics. 2012 Apr;4(2):133-4. doi: 10.2217/epi.12.15.

Cancer cells simultaneously harbor global losses and gains in DNA methylation. 
We demonstrate that inducing cellular oxidative stress by hydrogen peroxide 
treatment recruits DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) to damaged chromatin. DNMT1 
becomes part of a complex(es) containing DNMT3B and members of the polycomb 
repressive complex 4. Hydrogen peroxide treatment causes relocalization of these 
proteins from non-GC-rich to GC-rich areas. Key components are similarly 
enriched at gene promoters in an in vivo colitis model. Although high-expression 
genes enriched for members of the complex have histone mark and nascent 
transcription changes, CpG island-containing low-expression genes gain promoter 
DNA methylation. Thus, oxidative damage induces formation and relocalization of 
a silencing complex that may explain cancer-specific aberrant DNA methylation 
and transcriptional silencing.

2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.09.012
PMCID: PMC3220885
PMID: 22094255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Elevated levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) arising from alterations in cellular metabolism and inflammatory responses constitute a key risk state for increased cancer susceptibility ( Federico et al., 2007 ). The major forms of oxidative DNA damage are nonbulky lesions such as 8-oxo-2′deoxyguanosine (8-oxo-dG) and thymine glycol that are repaired predominantly by base excision repair (BER) ( Reardon et al., 1997 ).

The above DNA repair requires dynamic changes in surrounding chromatin including changes in nucleosome positioning and histone modifications. The best characterized chromatin alteration in DNA repair is the phosphorylation of the histone variant H2AX (γ-H2AX) by DNA damage response protein kinases ( Rogakou et al., 1998 ). This modification helps stabilize the interaction of repair factors with the break sites, leading to further chromatin alterations. Histone acetylases and deacetylases also localize to sites of DNA damage to facilitate repair by increasing access of repair proteins to the break site, repressing transcription at sites of damage, restoring the local chromatin environment after repair is complete, and turning off the DNA damage response ( Tamburini and Tyler, 2005 ). In this regard, (Sirtuin-1) SIRT1 is a NAD + -dependent class III histone deacetylase that plays a role in gene silencing in cancer cells ( Pruitt et al., 2006 ) and has been implicated in DNA damage repair in both yeast and mammalian cells. SIRT1 is recruited to sites of DNA damage and interacts with and deacetylates other proteins involved in the DNA damage (For review, see ( Fan and Luo, 2010 )). After DNA repair, DNA methylation also needs to be reestablished, possibly by the recruitment of the DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) that catalyze CpG methylation, including DNMT1 which plays a role in methylating newly replicated DNA ( Leonhardt et al., 1992 ), and DNMT3A and DNMT3B which are mostly responsible for de novo DNA methylation ( Okano et al., 1999 ).

The above epigenetic players have been linked to patterns of cancer-related gene transcriptional silencing, in association with promoter CpG island DNA hypermethylation. We, and others, have shown that a large fraction of the genes that undergo promoter CpG Island DNA hypermethylation in cancer are unmethylated in embryonic stem and progenitor cells and held in low/poised states of transcription by polycomb group (PcG) proteins ( Ohm et al., 2007 ; Schlesinger et al., 2007 ; Widschwendter et al., 2007 ). Importantly, SIRT1 has been described as part of a transformation specific PcG complex, PRC4, which is found in embryonic and adult stem cells and cancer cells ( Kuzmichev et al., 2005 ). In addition to SIRT1, the PRC4 complex contains the PcG proteins, Enhancer of Zeste protein-2 (EZH2) which catalyzes the trimethylation of lysine 27 of histone H3 and a specific isoform of EED (EED2) that is absent from previously identified PRC complexes. SIRT1 has also been shown to interact with DNMT1 ( Espada et al., 2007 ). The DNMTs have been linked to PcG proteins in the context of epigenetic gene silencing. Both DNMT1 and DNMT3B interact with EZH2, which in turn facilitates the binding of the DNMTs to EZH2 target promoters ( Vire et al., 2006 ).

In the present study, we investigate epigenetic alterations induced by the ROS, hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), and by inflammation in mouse tissue. We examine changes in the interaction and chromatin binding of the epigenetic proteins discussed above and the functional consequences of these changes. This work attempts to determine a mechanism by which cancer risk states, such as chronic inflammation, can contribute to cancer-related abnormal gene silencing and shifts in DNA methylation.

DISCUSSION

In the present study, we link several proteins involved in transcriptional repression to the DNA damage response. We provide evidence for a role for DNMT1 in the response of cells to H 2 O 2 treatment. This enzyme becomes more tightly bound to chromatin after H 2 O 2 treatment in the context of damage-induced foci that co-localize with γ-H2AX. Moreover, DNMT1 appears responsible for the tightening of the PRC4 component, SIRT1, to chromatin after H 2 O 2 treatment. SIRT1 has been implicated in the response to DNA damage and transcriptional repression in many ways as previously discussed. While in inflamed mouse tissue we do not see an increase in binding of DNMT1 to chromatin, we see an increase in binding of the PRC4 components, SIRT1 and EZH2. Increases in binding of DNMT1 to chromatin may occur at an earlier time point than the one we studied, as the in vivo model time point is two days after infection compared to 30 minutes after treatment for our in vitro model. However, we do implicate DNMT1 in the in vivo response to colonic inflammation by demonstrating interaction between EZH2 and DNMT1 and enrichment of both of these proteins at the CpG islands of low expression genes in this inflamed tissue, in a manner consistent with our in vitro results.

Our observations presented here suggest that tightening of DNMT1 and SIRT1 to chromatin after H 2 O 2 treatment is actively associated with DNA damage and/or repair. Our evidence by immunofluorescence studies for co-localization of DNMT1, SIRT1, and EZH2 to DNA damage-induced foci marked by γ-H2AX suggests targeting to ongoing DNA damage. Previously, we have implicated DNMT1 in double strand break repair and recently another group has further studied this role for DNMT1 ( Ha et al., 2010 ; O’Hagan et al., 2008 ). We did not see DNMT1 become more tightly bound to chromatin after IR treatment and the observed narrow localization of γ-H2AX signal at the promoter region by ChIP-chip after H 2 O 2 exposure is not representative of the typical mega base domain enrichment seen after double strand breaks ( Rogakou et al., 1999 ). Thus, our findings suggest that, after H 2 O 2 treatment, double strand breaks are not the dominant trigger for the dynamics we are reporting. Because levels of OGG1 modulate the tightening of DNMT1 binding to chromatin, we suggest that either the specific 8-oxodG base damage or the BER pathway that repairs this type of damage is responsible for recruitment of member of the silencing complex to chromatin. We propose that the promoter targeted γ-H2AX is likely marking sites of base damage and this hypothesis is supported by the enrichment of 8-oxoguanine at GC-rich promoters after H 2 O 2 treatment. We suggest that the enrichment of damage at these areas of high GC content may be because guanine is the most easily oxidized of the four deoxyribonucleosides and therefore may be targeted by oxidative damage ( Steenken, 1997 ). The co-enrichment of DNMT1, SIRT1, DNMT3B, and EZH2 at these sites suggests that these proteins are being localized to sites of base damage induced by H 2 O 2 treatment. While in our in vivo model we have not assessed whether the enrichment of key complex constituents is also occurring at the sites of base damage, it has been demonstrated that purified B. fragilis toxin causes an increase in γ-H2AX and ROS in colonic epithelial cells. This data suggests that our in vivo model involves a similar induction of oxidative damage as our in vitro model ( Goodwin et al., 2011 ).

One of the intriguing implications of our data is the potential role for increased levels of cellular ROS that accompany cancer-risk states such as inflammation in the formation of cancer-specific aberrant patterns of DNA methylation and transcriptional silencing. First, as we have noted, cellular transformation has been associated with the presence of the PRC4 iso-complex ( Kuzmichev et al., 2005 ) that we now link to DNMTs during H 2 O 2 exposure. This complex has altered substrate specificity from the typical PRC2/3 complexes possibly due to the specific isoform of EED that it contains (EED2) ( Kim et al., 2007 ). Since both pre-neoplastic and transformed cells undergo a significant amount of endogenous oxidative damage ( Federico et al., 2007 ), the basal PRC4 complex previously described in transformed cells may be the same as the complex we describe here. Because nuclear SIRT1 levels increase after H 2 O 2 treatment, it is possible that the increase in interaction demonstrated between SIRT1 and the other proteins in Figure 2 is due to higher levels of SIRT1, not to an induced interaction per say. However, either cause has the same outcome, namely higher levels of the complex.

Second, our findings suggest one potential mechanism that might help explain a conundrum in the abnormalities of DNA methylation in human cancer - namely, why cancer cells simultaneously harbor both widespread chromosomal loss of DNA methylation and increased DNA methylation in CpG islands of gene promoters ( Jones and Baylin, 2007 ). In terms of the losses, we find that enzymes that catalyze DNA methylation, DNMT1 and DNMT3B, shift away from non-GC-rich gene and chromosome regions. In a similar manner, it has previously been demonstrated in yeast and mammalian cells that DNA damage leads to a shift in localization of SIRT1 from repressed gene regions to sites of induced DNA damage resulting in transcriptional de-repression of genes that are basally repressed by SIRT1 ( Mills et al., 1999 ; Oberdoerffer et al., 2008 ). We suggest that when cells are exposed to chronic oxidative damage that is present during all phases of tumorigenesis, the induced shifts in chromosome localization that we demonstrate may be associated with losses of DNA methylation observed in cancer cells.

Finally, our observations may also help explain gains in DNA methylation at gene promoters in cancer cells. By examining histone mark and transcription changes, we demonstrate that enrichment of members of this silencing complex is associated with gene silencing. Importantly, however, in cells progressing towards transformation, the above translocalization would probably be transient at most genes with high basal transcription levels, such as housekeeping genes, and oncogenes, for which silencing would be detrimental to tumor cell growth. This hypothesis is supported by the lack of EZH2 and DNMT1 enrichment at the promoters of high expression CpG island-containing genes in the less harsh, longer time-frame, inflammatory in vivo model studied. In this regard, active transcription may prevent de novo promoter CpG island methylation ( Thomson et al., 2010 ). We demonstrate that genes with a history of frequent, cancer specific, CpG island promoter DNA hypermethylation show damage-induced enrichment for the members of the complex in cell culture and enrichment of EZH2 and DNMT1 in inflamed mouse tissue. In vitro we see an increase in DNA methylation that correlates with the low basal expression level of these genes, which harbor PcG complexes in embryonic stem and progenitor cells ( Ohm et al., 2007 ; Schlesinger et al., 2007 ; Widschwendter et al., 2007 ). We hypothesize that such localization of the DNMT-PRC4 complex and increase in DNA methylation at low expression promoter CpG island-containing genes might be more persistent over the course of chronic ROS damage during tumorigenesis setting up a scenario for the expansion of DNA methylation in the CpG islands involved. Our previous work with a promoter CpG island, double strand break DNA damage model, suggests this time-dependent context for the expansion of such DNA hypermethylation ( O’Hagan et al., 2008 ).
