---
pmid: '17873885'
title: E2-BRCA1 RING interactions dictate synthesis of mono- or specific polyubiquitin
  chain linkages.
authors:
- Christensen DE
- Brzovic PS
- Klevit RE
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nsmb1295
---

# E2-BRCA1 RING interactions dictate synthesis of mono- or specific polyubiquitin chain linkages.
**Authors:** Christensen DE, Brzovic PS, Klevit RE
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb1295](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb1295)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2007 Oct;14(10):941-8. doi: 10.1038/nsmb1295. Epub 2007
Sep  16.

E2-BRCA1 RING interactions dictate synthesis of mono- or specific polyubiquitin 
chain linkages.

Christensen DE(1), Brzovic PS, Klevit RE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Box 357350, Seattle, 
Washington 98195-7350, USA.

An E3 ubiquitin ligase mediates the transfer of activated ubiquitin from an E2 
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme to its substrate lysine residues. Using a 
structure-based, yeast two-hybrid strategy, we discovered six previously 
unidentified interactions between the human heterodimeric RING E3 BRCA1-BARD1 
and the human E2s UbcH6, Ube2e2, UbcM2, Ubc13, Ube2k and Ube2w. All six E2s bind 
directly to the BRCA1 RING motif and are active with BRCA1-BARD1 for 
autoubiquitination in vitro. Four of the E2s direct monoubiquitination of BRCA1. 
Ubc13-Mms2 and Ube2k direct the synthesis of Lys63- or Lys48-linked ubiquitin 
chains on BRCA1 and require an acceptor ubiquitin attached to BRCA1. Differences 
between the mono- and polyubiquitination activities of the BRCA1-interacting E2s 
correlate with their ability to bind ubiquitin noncovalently at a site distal to 
the active site. Thus, BRCA1 has the ability to direct the synthesis of specific 
polyubiquitin chain linkages, depending on the E2 bound to its RING.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb1295
PMID: 17873885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
