---
pmid: '29743376'
title: Transmembrane Protein pUL50 of Human Cytomegalovirus Inhibits ISGylation by
  Downregulating UBE1L.
authors:
- Lee MK
- Kim YJ
- Kim YE
- Han TH
- Milbradt J
- Marschall M
- Ahn JH
journal: J Virol
year: '2018'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC6052311
doi: 10.1128/JVI.00462-18
---

# Transmembrane Protein pUL50 of Human Cytomegalovirus Inhibits ISGylation by Downregulating UBE1L.
**Authors:** Lee MK, Kim YJ, Kim YE, Han TH, Milbradt J, Marschall M, Ahn JH
**Journal:** J Virol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.00462-18](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00462-18)
**PMC:** [PMC6052311](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6052311/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2018 Jul 17;92(15):e00462-18. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00462-18. Print 2018
Aug  1.

Transmembrane Protein pUL50 of Human Cytomegalovirus Inhibits ISGylation by 
Downregulating UBE1L.

Lee MK(1), Kim YJ(1), Kim YE(1), Han TH(1), Milbradt J(2), Marschall M(2), Ahn 
JH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of 
Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Suwon, Republic of Korea.
(2)Institute for Clinical and Molecular Virology, Friedrich-Alexander University 
of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(3)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of 
Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Suwon, Republic of Korea jahn@skku.edu.

Interferon-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15) encodes a ubiquitin-like protein that can 
be conjugated to proteins via an enzymatic cascade involving the E1, E2, and E3 
enzymes. ISG15 expression and protein ISGylation modulate viral infection; 
however, the viral mechanisms regulating the function of ISG15 and ISGylation 
are not well understood. We recently showed that ISGylation suppresses the 
growth of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) at multiple steps of the virus life cycle 
and that the virus-encoded pUL26 protein inhibits protein ISGylation. In this 
study, we demonstrate that the HCMV UL50-encoded transmembrane protein, a 
component of the nuclear egress complex, also inhibits ISGylation. pUL50 
interacted with UBE1L, an E1-activating enzyme for ISGylation, and (to a lesser 
extent) with ISG15, as did pUL26. However, unlike pUL26, pUL50 caused 
proteasomal degradation of UBE1L. The UBE1L level induced in human fibroblast 
cells by interferon beta treatment or virus infection was reduced by pUL50 
expression. This activity of pUL50 involved the transmembrane (TM) domain within 
its C-terminal region, although pUL50 could interact with UBE1L in a manner 
independent of the TM domain. Consistently, colocalization of pUL50 with UBE1L 
was observed in cells treated with a proteasome inhibitor. Furthermore, we found 
that RNF170, an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated ubiquitin E3 ligase, 
interacted with pUL50 and promoted pUL50-mediated UBE1L degradation via 
ubiquitination. Our results demonstrate a novel role for the pUL50 transmembrane 
protein of HCMV in the regulation of protein ISGylation.IMPORTANCE Proteins can 
be conjugated covalently by ubiquitin or ubiquitin-like proteins, such as SUMO 
and ISG15. ISG15 is highly induced in viral infection, and ISG15 conjugation, 
termed ISGylation, plays important regulatory roles in viral growth. Although 
ISGylation has been shown to negatively affect many viruses, including human 
cytomegalovirus (HCMV), viral countermeasures that might modulate ISGylation are 
not well understood. In the present study, we show that the transmembrane 
protein encoded by HCMV UL50 inhibits ISGylation by causing proteasomal 
degradation of UBE1L, an E1-activating enzyme for ISGylation. This pUL50 
activity requires membrane targeting. In support of this finding, RNF170, an 
ER-associated ubiquitin E3 ligase, interacts with pUL50 and promotes 
UL50-mediated UBE1L ubiquitination and degradation. Our results provide the 
first evidence, to our knowledge, that viruses can regulate ISGylation by 
directly targeting the ISGylation E1 enzyme.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00462-18
PMCID: PMC6052311
PMID: 29743376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

ABSTRACT

Interferon-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15) encodes a ubiquitin-like protein that can be conjugated to proteins via an enzymatic cascade involving the E1, E2, and E3 enzymes. ISG15 expression and protein ISGylation modulate viral infection; however, the viral mechanisms regulating the function of ISG15 and ISGylation are not well understood. We recently showed that ISGylation suppresses the growth of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) at multiple steps of the virus life cycle and that the virus-encoded pUL26 protein inhibits protein ISGylation. In this study, we demonstrate that the HCMV UL50-encoded transmembrane protein, a component of the nuclear egress complex, also inhibits ISGylation. pUL50 interacted with UBE1L, an E1-activating enzyme for ISGylation, and (to a lesser extent) with ISG15, as did pUL26. However, unlike pUL26, pUL50 caused proteasomal degradation of UBE1L. The UBE1L level induced in human fibroblast cells by interferon beta treatment or virus infection was reduced by pUL50 expression. This activity of pUL50 involved the transmembrane (TM) domain within its C-terminal region, although pUL50 could interact with UBE1L in a manner independent of the TM domain. Consistently, colocalization of pUL50 with UBE1L was observed in cells treated with a proteasome inhibitor. Furthermore, we found that RNF170, an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated ubiquitin E3 ligase, interacted with pUL50 and promoted pUL50-mediated UBE1L degradation via ubiquitination. Our results demonstrate a novel role for the pUL50 transmembrane protein of HCMV in the regulation of protein ISGylation.

IMPORTANCE Proteins can be conjugated covalently by ubiquitin or ubiquitin-like proteins, such as SUMO and ISG15. ISG15 is highly induced in viral infection, and ISG15 conjugation, termed ISGylation, plays important regulatory roles in viral growth. Although ISGylation has been shown to negatively affect many viruses, including human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), viral countermeasures that might modulate ISGylation are not well understood. In the present study, we show that the transmembrane protein encoded by HCMV UL50 inhibits ISGylation by causing proteasomal degradation of UBE1L, an E1-activating enzyme for ISGylation. This pUL50 activity requires membrane targeting. In support of this finding, RNF170, an ER-associated ubiquitin E3 ligase, interacts with pUL50 and promotes UL50-mediated UBE1L ubiquitination and degradation. Our results provide the first evidence, to our knowledge, that viruses can regulate ISGylation by directly targeting the ISGylation E1 enzyme.

INTRODUCTION

Interferon-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15) encodes a ubiquitin-like protein that is covalently conjugated to lysine residues of a substrate protein through an enzymatic cascade involving E1, E2, and E3 enzymes, similar to the ubiquitin conjugation pathway ( 1 , 2 ). UBE1L is the E1-activating enzyme for ISG15, and UbcH8, a ubiquitin E2-conjugating enzyme, also functions as the ISG15 E2-conjugating enzyme. E3 ligases for ISGylation in human cells include the HERC domain- and RCC1-like domain-containing protein 5 (Herc5), estrogen-responsive finger protein (EFP), and a human homolog of the Drosophila ariadne gene product (HHARI). ISG15, UBE1L, UbcH8, and Herc5 are all interferon (IFN) inducible. ISG15 can be removed reversibly from substrates by an ISG15-specific protease, USP18 (also known as UBP43), which is also IFN inducible (reviewed in reference 3 ). USP18 also acts as a negative regulator of the innate immune response, independent of its ISG15-deconjugating (deISGylating) activity, by association with a subunit of the type I IFN receptor, IFNAR2 ( 4 , 5 ).

ISG15 or ISGylation represses the growth of diverse viruses, including influenza virus (types A and B), human immunodeficiency virus, avian sarcoma/leukosis virus, hepatitis C virus, Japanese encephalitis virus, Sindbis virus, vesicular stomatitis virus, dengue virus, West Nile virus, Ebola virus, porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus, Chikungunya virus, herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1), murine gammaherpesvirus 68, and vaccinia virus (VACV) ( 6 , 7 ; reviewed in reference 8 ). Recently, the antiviral activities of ISG15 or ISGylation were also demonstrated for Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) ( 9 ), respiratory syncytial virus ( 10 ), and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) ( 11 , 12 ). In contrast to the antiviral activities of ISG15, free ISG15 has also been shown to negatively regulate the type I IFN response in humans by promoting sustained expression of USP18, which negatively regulates IFN signaling, suggesting an ISGylation-independent role for ISG15 in IFN pathway regulation ( 13 – 16 ).

Studies on the antiviral mechanisms of ISG15 have demonstrated that ISGylation regulates various steps of the virus life cycle. ISGylation can directly inhibit the functions of viral proteins. ISGylation of the influenza A virus (IAV) NS1 protein inhibits its binding to importin-α, blocking NS1 nuclear import ( 17 ), while ISGylation of the influenza B virus (IBV) NP protein inhibits its oligomerization, inhibiting the formation of the viral ribonucleoprotein complex ( 18 ). ISGylation of HCMV pUL26 regulates its ubiquitination and inhibits its activity to suppress tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α)-mediated NF-κB activation ( 12 ). ISGylation can also affect viral growth by regulating cellular proteins. ISGylation of Nedd4 inhibits release of Ebola virus VP40 virus-like particles ( 19 ), while ISGylation of CHMP5 inhibits release of retroviruses ( 20 , 21 ), and probably HCMV ( 12 ). ISGylation also affects microRNA (miRNA) functions ( 22 ) and the formation of autophagic clusters, inhibiting the growth of KSHV and HSV-1, respectively ( 23 ). Furthermore, ISGylation affects the early steps of the virus life cycle, such as virus entry of norovirus and viral gene expression in HCMV ( 12 , 24 ).

Viral countermeasures against the antiviral effects of ISG15 and/or ISGylation have been demonstrated for some viruses. The IBV NS1 protein binds to ISG15 and suppresses the levels of ISGylation as it prevents the E1 enzyme from conjugating ISG15 ( 25 ). Furthermore, binding of NS1 to ISGylated NP protein appears to block the dominant negative effect of ISGylated NP on viral RNA synthesis ( 18 ). In VACV infection, the VACV E3 protein can bind to ISG15 and inhibit its antiviral activity ( 26 ). During HCMV infection, pUL26 binds to ISG15, UBE1L, and Herc5, and these interactions appear to be responsible for inhibiting ISGylation ( 12 ). Viruses also encode deISGylation enzymes. Nairoviruses and arteriviruses encode an ovarian tumor (OTU) domain-containing protease ( 27 ), while severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) encodes papain-like protease (PLpro) enzymes that cleave ISG15 from its target proteins ( 28 ). However, viral mechanisms that regulate ISGylation enzymes are less well known.

HCMV belongs to the betaherpesvirus subfamily and typically causes latent and persistent infection. However, reactivation of virus in immunocompromised individuals, such as AIDS patients and transplantation recipients, and primary infections of newborns can result in severe disease ( 29 ). During lytic infection, HCMV gene expression occurs in a three-step sequential fashion, with immediate early (IE), early (E), and late (L) gene expression. HCMV expresses proteins that are able to counteract IFN production and subsequent ISG activation. IE2 and pp65 inhibit IFN production ( 30 – 32 ), whereas IE1 directly interacts with STAT2 and PML to suppress the IFN response ( 33 – 37 ). HCMV infection reduces levels of JAK1 and p48, two components of the type I IFN signaling pathway ( 38 , 39 ). The stability and phosphorylation of STAT proteins are modulated during HCMV infection ( 40 , 41 ). ISG15 expression and levels of ISGylation are upregulated immediately after HCMV infection via signaling pathways, including one mediated by cGAS/STING ( 11 ). However, HCMV appears to be armed with countermeasures, such as pUL26, which inhibits ISGylation at later stages of infection ( 12 ).

During HCMV infection, the core of the viral nuclear egress complex (NEC) is formed by two conserved viral proteins: pUL50 and pUL53. The integral membrane protein pUL50 is associated with the inner nuclear membrane (INM) by its transmembrane (TM) domain, whereas the nuclear phosphoprotein pUL53 carries a classical nuclear localization signal and accumulates in the nuclear rim upon interaction with the INM-associated pUL50 protein. Once the core NEC is formed, further NEC proteins, such as p32/gC1qR, emerin, and protein kinases, such as the viral protein kinase pUL97, cellular protein kinase C isoform a (PKCa), and cellular cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1), are recruited ( 42 – 46 ) in order to phosphorylate nuclear lamins, resulting in lamina disassembly ( 47 – 49 ). The recently solved crystal structure of the pUL50-pUL53 complex suggests that pUL50-pUL53 heterodimers assemble to form hexameric ring-like structures, acting as a scaffold for binding of further NEC proteins ( 50 ). The association of nuclear capsids with the NEC proteins has been demonstrated ( 51 ).

In this study, we demonstrate that the HCMV-encoded transmembrane protein pUL50 acts as a negative regulator of protein ISGylation by interacting with UBE1L and inducing its proteasomal degradation. We also show that this activity of pUL50 requires its transmembrane domain. Furthermore, we demonstrate that RNF170, an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated ubiquitin E3 ligase, interacts with pUL50 and is involved in pUL50-mediated UBE1L degradation.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we demonstrated that the transmembrane protein pUL50 of HCMV interacts with UBE1L, an E1-activating enzyme for ISGylation, and causes its proteasomal degradation. pUL50 expression in HCMV-permissive cells reduced the UBE1L level that was induced by IFN-β treatment or UV-HCMV infection. Studies on the mechanism underlying this pUL50 activity revealed that although the C-terminal TM domain is not essential for UBE1L binding, it is required for UBE1L degradation. Moreover, we found that RNF170, an ER-associated ubiquitin E3 ligase, interacts with pUL50 and promotes pUL50-mediated UBE1L ubiquitination for degradation. Taken together, these results give rise to the idea that pUL50 recruits UBE1L to the ER membrane, where RNF170 facilitates UBE1L ubiquitination for proteasomal degradation. Given the role of the ISGylation pathway in host defense against virus infection ( 8 ), the findings of the present study reveal an unexpected role for pUL50, a component of the NEC that mediates the nuclear egress of the capsid, in counteracting the host immune response by downregulating protein ISGylation.

pUL50 is the second HCMV protein identified that inhibits ISGylation. We previously showed that pUL26 interacts with ISG15, UBE1L, and Herc5 and inhibits ISGylation, although the underlying mechanism is unclear ( 12 ). In the current study, we also demonstrated that pUL50 interacts with ISG15 and UBE1L. Although both pUL26 and pUL50 target ISG15 and UBE1L, they appear to use different mechanisms to inhibit ISGylation, since only pUL50 induced UBE1L degradation. Given that pUL50 is a membrane protein that targets the ER and eventually the INM to act as a regulator of the nuclear egress of the capsid, the requirement of the TM domain of pUL50 for UBE1L degradation suggests that the ER is the site of UBE1L degradation. In support of this model, pUL50 was colocalized with UBE1L at the nuclear periphery, which appeared to include the compressed ER membrane, in the presence of a proteasome inhibitor. Furthermore, an ER-associated ubiquitin E3 ligase was found to bind to pUL50 and promote UL50-mediated UBE1L degradation. Recently, HSV-1 pUL34, a homolog of HCMV pUL50, was shown to remodel the global ER architecture, including ER compression around the nuclear membrane during virus infection, which may lead to the recruitment of nuclear egress regulators to the nuclear membrane ( 57 ). Therefore, it is also an intriguing scenario that the pUL50-triggered remodeling of the ER architecture is responsible for the exposure of UBE1L to ER-associated ubiquitin E3 ligases, such as RNF170. This activity of pUL50 may also be related to the high level of pUL50-induced loss of Herc5, which is associated with polyribosomes, and (to a lesser extent) of ISG15, which weakly interacts with pUL50.

Analyses of the expression of pUL50 with a C-terminal HA tag from transfected or recombinant virus-infected cells revealed that a smaller isoform of pUL50, of about 26 kDa (referred to as UL50-p26 in this study), is expressed from the UL50 gene. This isoform appears to initiate from an internal methionine codon and encompasses the C-terminal half of pUL50, including the TM domain, but not the N-terminal globular domain necessary for pUL53 binding to form the NEC. We observed that this isoform was expressed earlier than pUL50 in virus-infected cells, but it became less abundant at the late phases of infection and was capable of moderately inhibiting ISGylation in cotransfection/ISGylation assays. However, whether UL50-p26 plays a regulatory role in viral infection needs further investigation.

Since Herc5, an E3 ligase for ISGylation, is associated with polyribosomes ( 58 ), abundantly expressed viral proteins may often be subjected to ISGylation in virus-infected cells. We previously showed that many viral proteins are ISGylated in cotransfection/ISGylation assays ( 12 ). The finding that pUL50 interacts with UBE1L and ISG15 prompted us to test whether pUL50 is a substrate for ISGylation. In cotransfection/ISGylation assays, pUL50 was indeed ISGylated within the central CR2 region of the N-terminal globular domain. Analysis of lysine-to-arginine mutants suggested that ISGylation occurred in several lysine residues in the CR2 region, making it difficult to further investigate the role of pUL50 ISGylation. It is conceivable that ISGylation of pUL50 may affect its targeting to the INM or interaction with pUL53. Determining whether ISGylation of pUL50 occurs during infection and affects its functions will require further study.

ISGylation appears to modulate both early and late events of HCMV infection. In our previous study, ISGylation enhancement by overexpression of E1, E2, and E3 enzymes and ISG15 reduced the activation of viral immediate early, early, and late promoters and the release of virions, while ISGylation reduction by short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated Herc5 knockdown increased both viral gene expression and virion release ( 12 ). ISGylation of endosomal proteins was recently shown to promote the fusion of multivesicular bodies with lysosomes or autophagosomes and to inhibit exosome secretion and virus spread ( 59 , 60 ). Considering that pUL50, which is expressed at a delayed early time after infection, targets the ER, is associated with ER-resident E3 ligase, and causes UBE1L degradation, it is tempting to study a regulatory role for pUL50 in these vesicle-related events.
