---
pmid: '16319894'
title: Global analysis of protein phosphorylation in yeast.
authors:
- Ptacek J
- Devgan G
- Michaud G
- Zhu H
- Zhu X
- Fasolo J
- Guo H
- Jona G
- Breitkreutz A
- Sopko R
- McCartney RR
- Schmidt MC
- Rachidi N
- Lee SJ
- Mah AS
- Meng L
- Stark MJ
- Stern DF
- De Virgilio C
- Tyers M
- Andrews B
- Gerstein M
- Schweitzer B
- Predki PF
- Snyder M
journal: Nature
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature04187
---

# Global analysis of protein phosphorylation in yeast.
**Authors:** Ptacek J, Devgan G, Michaud G, Zhu H, Zhu X, Fasolo J, Guo H, Jona G, Breitkreutz A, Sopko R, McCartney RR, Schmidt MC, Rachidi N, Lee SJ, Mah AS, Meng L, Stark MJ, Stern DF, De Virgilio C, Tyers M, Andrews B, Gerstein M, Schweitzer B, Predki PF, Snyder M
**Journal:** Nature (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature04187](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature04187)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2005 Dec 1;438(7068):679-84. doi: 10.1038/nature04187.

Global analysis of protein phosphorylation in yeast.

Ptacek J(1), Devgan G, Michaud G, Zhu H, Zhu X, Fasolo J, Guo H, Jona G, 
Breitkreutz A, Sopko R, McCartney RR, Schmidt MC, Rachidi N, Lee SJ, Mah AS, 
Meng L, Stark MJ, Stern DF, De Virgilio C, Tyers M, Andrews B, Gerstein M, 
Schweitzer B, Predki PF, Snyder M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New 
Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA.

Protein phosphorylation is estimated to affect 30% of the proteome and is a 
major regulatory mechanism that controls many basic cellular processes. Until 
recently, our biochemical understanding of protein phosphorylation on a global 
scale has been extremely limited; only one half of the yeast kinases have known 
in vivo substrates and the phosphorylating kinase is known for less than 160 
phosphoproteins. Here we describe, with the use of proteome chip technology, the 
in vitro substrates recognized by most yeast protein kinases: we identified over 
4,000 phosphorylation events involving 1,325 different proteins. These 
substrates represent a broad spectrum of different biochemical functions and 
cellular roles. Distinct sets of substrates were recognized by each protein 
kinase, including closely related kinases of the protein kinase A family and 
four cyclin-dependent kinases that vary only in their cyclin subunits. Although 
many substrates reside in the same cellular compartment or belong to the same 
functional category as their phosphorylating kinase, many others do not, 
indicating possible new roles for several kinases. Furthermore, integration of 
the phosphorylation results with protein-protein interaction and transcription 
factor binding data revealed novel regulatory modules. Our phosphorylation 
results have been assembled into a first-generation phosphorylation map for 
yeast. Because many yeast proteins and pathways are conserved, these results 
will provide insights into the mechanisms and roles of protein phosphorylation 
in many eukaryotes.

DOI: 10.1038/nature04187
PMID: 16319894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
