---
pmid: '17349954'
title: A critical role for the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme Ubc13 in initiating homologous
  recombination.
authors:
- Zhao GY
- Sonoda E
- Barber LJ
- Oka H
- Murakawa Y
- Yamada K
- Ikura T
- Wang X
- Kobayashi M
- Yamamoto K
- Boulton SJ
- Takeda S
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.01.029
---

# A critical role for the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme Ubc13 in initiating homologous recombination.
**Authors:** Zhao GY, Sonoda E, Barber LJ, Oka H, Murakawa Y, Yamada K, Ikura T, Wang X, Kobayashi M, Yamamoto K, Boulton SJ, Takeda S
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2007.01.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2007.01.029)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2007 Mar 9;25(5):663-75. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.01.029.

A critical role for the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme Ubc13 in initiating 
homologous recombination.

Zhao GY(1), Sonoda E, Barber LJ, Oka H, Murakawa Y, Yamada K, Ikura T, Wang X, 
Kobayashi M, Yamamoto K, Boulton SJ, Takeda S.

Author information:
(1)CREST Laboratory, Department of Radiation Genetics, Kyoto University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Yoshida Konoe, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

The ubiquitin (Ub)-conjugating enzyme Ubc13 is implicated in 
Rad6/Rad18-dependent postreplication repair (PRR) in budding yeast, but its 
function in vertebrates is not known. We show here that disruption or siRNA 
depletion of UBC13 in chicken DT40 or human cells confers severe growth defects 
due to chromosome instability, and hypersensitivity to both UV and ionizing 
radiation, consistent with a conserved role for Ubc13 in PRR. Remarkably, 
Ubc13-deficient cells are also compromised for DNA double-strand break (DSB) 
repair by homologous recombination (HR). Recruitment and activation of the E3 Ub 
ligase function of BRCA1 and the subsequent formation of the Rad51 nucleoprotein 
filament at DSBs are abolished in Ubc13-deficient cells. Furthermore, generation 
of ssDNA/RPA complexes at DSBs is severely attenuated in the absence of Ubc13. 
These data reveal a critical and unexpected role for vertebrate Ubc13 in the 
initiation of HR at the level of DSB processing.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.01.029
PMID: 17349954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
