---
pmid: '22563681'
title: Cyclin-dependent kinase-dependent phosphorylation of Lif1 and Sae2 controls
  imprecise nonhomologous end joining accompanied by double-strand break resection.
authors:
- Matsuzaki K
- Terasawa M
- Iwasaki D
- Higashide M
- Shinohara M
journal: Genes Cells
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC11497803
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2012.01602.x
---

# Cyclin-dependent kinase-dependent phosphorylation of Lif1 and Sae2 controls imprecise nonhomologous end joining accompanied by double-strand break resection.
**Authors:** Matsuzaki K, Terasawa M, Iwasaki D, Higashide M, Shinohara M
**Journal:** Genes Cells (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2443.2012.01602.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2443.2012.01602.x)
**PMC:** [PMC11497803](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11497803/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Cells. 2012 Jun;17(6):473-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2012.01602.x.
Epub  2012 May 8.

Cyclin-dependent kinase-dependent phosphorylation of Lif1 and Sae2 controls 
imprecise nonhomologous end joining accompanied by double-strand break 
resection.

Matsuzaki K(1), Terasawa M, Iwasaki D, Higashide M, Shinohara M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrated Protein Functions, Institute for Protein Research, 
Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are repaired by two distinct pathways, 
homologous recombination (HR) and nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ). NHEJ 
includes two pathways, that is, precise and imprecise end joining. We found that 
Lif1, a component of the DNA ligase IV complex in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, was 
phosphorylated by cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) at Ser261 during the S to G2 
phase but not during G1 phase. This phosphorylation was required for efficient 
NHEJ in G2/M cells, rather than in G1 cells. It also promotes the stable binding 
of Lif1 protein to DSBs, specifically in G2/M-arrested cells, which shows the 
resection of DSB ends. Thus, Lif1 phosphorylation plays a critical role in a 
certain type of imprecise NHEJ accompanied by DSB end resection and 
micro-homology. Lif1 phosphorylation at Ser261 is probably involved in 
micro-homology-dependent end joining associated with producing single-stranded 
DSB ends that are formed by Sae2 as early intermediates in the HR pathway. 
CDK-dependent modification of the NHEJ pathway might make DSB ends compatible 
for NHEJ and thus prevent competition between HR and NHEJ in hierarchy on the 
choice of DSB repair pathways.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2012 by the Molecular Biology Society 
of Japan/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2012.01602.x
PMID: 22563681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

ABSTRACT

Heavy ion beam (HIB) irradiation is widely utilized in studies of cosmic rays-induced cellular effects and microbial breeding. Establishing an accurate dose-survival relationship is crucial for selecting the optimal irradiation dose. Typically, after irradiating logarithmic-phase cell suspensions with HIB, the survival fraction (SF) is determined by the ratio of clonal-forming units in irradiated versus control groups. However, our findings indicated that SF measurements were time sensitive. For the Saccharomyces cerevisiae model, the observed SF initially declined and subsequently increased in a eutrophic state; conversely, in an oligotrophic state, it remained relatively stable within 120 minutes. This time effect of SF observations in the eutrophic state can be ascribed to HIB-exposed cells experiencing cell cycle arrest, whereas the control proliferated rapidly, resulting in an over-time disproportionate change in viable cell count. Therefore, an alternative involves irradiating oligotrophic cells, determining SF thereafter, and transferring cells to the eutrophic state to facilitate DNA repair-mutation. Transcriptomic comparisons under these two trophic states yield valuable insights into the DNA damage response. Although DNA repair was postponed in an oligotrophic state, cells proactively mobilized specific repair pathways to advance this process. Effective nutritional supplementation should occur within 120 minutes, beyond this window, a decline in SF indicates an irreversible loss of repair capability. Upon transition to the eutrophic state, S. cerevisiae swiftly adapted and completed the repair. This study helps to minimize time-dependent variability in SF observations and to ensure effective damage repair and mutation in microbial breeding using HIB or other mutagens. It also promotes the understanding of microbial responses to complex environments.

INTRODUCTION

Mutation breeding is an important means to create new and excellent microbial genetic resources ( 1 , 2 ). For most physical and chemical mutagens, the dose-survival effect induced by their action on microorganisms has attracted much attention in the practice of mutation breeding because the dose, survival fraction (SF), and positive mutation rate are closely related ( 3 ). The empirical approach was to mutate the microorganism at a dose corresponding to a SF of about 70%, and the positive mutation rate was often satisfactory in this condition ( 1 , 4 , 5 ). Therefore, accurate quantification of dose-survival effects in microbial mutation breeding is crucial for selecting the best dose of mutagens and improving breeding efficiency.

Heavy ion beam (HIB) irradiation is known to be the most ideal mutagenesis technology ( 5 ). HIB is formed when atoms heavier than helium are ionized and accelerated to 10 −2 –10 −1 of the speed of light. It has the physical characteristics of high linear energy transfer (LET), small discrete emissions, and a large damage cross-section, and can play the roles of energy and mass deposition, momentum transfer, and charge exchange on living matter ( 6 ). These characteristics enable HIB irradiation to induce a large amount of DNA damage in microbial cells, leading to numerous mutations ( 7 , 8 ). For fundamental research, the accelerator simulates the emission of cosmic rays on earth, aiding in the exploration of damage, repair, and mutation mechanisms in microorganisms under this specific environmental condition. For instance, studies using microbial cell models have elucidated the roles of critical radiation parameters and key DNA repair proteins in genomic variations ( 5 ). For applied research, the excellent microbial strains obtained by HIB irradiation breeding cover hundreds of strains from dozens of genera, involving medicine, food, industry, energy, and other fields, creating huge social and economic benefits ( 5 , 9 – 15 ). At the same time, the wide application of related technologies, such as omics, high-throughput screening, and genetic manipulation verification, has intuitively revealed the advantages of HIB irradiation at the micro level. These advantages include a high mutagenesis rate, a wide mutagenesis spectrum, great stability of mutants, and easy introduction of new favorable mutations ( 5 , 16 ). These studies will further promote the use of HIB to create new strains.

The irradiation parameters of HIB include dose, energy, LET, dose rate, ion types, etc. The change of any parameter will have an impact on biological effects (including mutagenic effects) ( 5 ). Among them, dose is one of the most important irradiation parameters. Irradiation dose-survival effect has important reference value in both HIB irradiation-based mutation breeding practice and biological effect research. In particular, the SF is closely related to the positive mutation rate. Almost every HIB irradiation breeding work focused on the dose-SF curve ( 3 , 9 , 12 , 14 , 15 ). Currently, there are some experiences and references regarding the relationships among irradiation dose, SF, and mutation rate for plants and microorganisms irradiated by HIB. Generally, for microbial models, in the middle- and high-dose range, the positive mutation rate was higher corresponding to the dose with an SF between 10% and 40% ( 3 ).

Evidently, the importance of dose-survival effect determination and the correlation between SF and positive mutation rate in HIB-based mutation breeding are consistent with those in conventional mutation breeding based on common physical and chemical mutagens. At the same time, HIB breeding is more representative ( 3 , 5 ). The close relationship among dose, SF, and positive mutation rate can be traced back to the source of the mutation, that is, error repair generates mutations, and mutations are a trade-off between damage and repair. The essence of choosing the appropriate dose according to the dose-survival effect is to find a balance between damage and repair which is beneficial to the occurrence of positive mutation ( 5 , 7 , 17 ). Therefore, accurate determination of SF is of great significance for selecting the most suitable treatment dose and ensuring a high efficiency of mutation breeding. Furthermore, investigating the DNA damage response of microorganisms to various physical and chemical factors necessitates controlling specific stress intensities to capture critical dynamic changes at the cellular and molecular levels ( 3 , 7 , 8 , 17 ). This also requires a precise characterization of the dose-SF curve.

To streamline operations, facilitate cellular damage repair, and enhance mutagenesis efficiency, environmental and applied microbiology studies employ HIB irradiation or other mutagens typically irradiated or treated single-celled microbial strains cultured in the complete medium during their logarithmic growth phase ( 4 , 5 , 9 , 14 , 15 ). First, this approach is convenient. More importantly, the cells were in good vitality and had a strong ability to repair damage when in a eutrophic state. This effect means that more damage-repair events will occur. Mutations originate from wrong damage repairs, and when the number of repair events and repaired cells increases, the likelihood of good mutants and corresponding genetic elements appearing in the mutant library increases ( 5 ). However, this procedure, while facilitating microbial DNA repair and mutation, may cause fluctuations in the observed SFs over time, introducing an uncertain variable. Taking HIB irradiation as an example, the logarithmic strain cells in the complete medium will undergo the damage repair-mutation process immediately after radiation in the eutrophic state ( 18 ). According to previous study on the repair dynamics of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and mammalian cells post-ionizing irradiation, it can be presumed that after radiation, the number of viable cells in the treatment group increases slowly due to cell cycle arrest and limited cell division activity ( 18 – 21 ). However, the control group without irradiation treatment proliferates normally, resulting in a rapid increase in the number of viable cells. In most mutation breeding work, the dose-survival effect is typically measured by diluting and plating the cell suspension from both the treated and untreated groups after exposure to irradiation ( 4 , 9 , 10 , 12 – 15 ). The SF for a specific dose is calculated by dividing the number of clonal-forming units (CFU) in the treated group by that of the control group. Proliferative death, caused by HIB irradiation and other mutagens, is a common form of microbial cell death ( 21 , 22 ). Therefore, the determination of SF based on CFU is a gold standard ( 18 ). However, the problem is that with time, the division and proliferation of the irradiated group were slow due to cell cycle arrest, but the untreated control group proliferated rapidly at the normal speed of logarithmic phase, and it is difficult to complete the coating at 0 time when measuring the SF in HIB irradiation mutagenesis ( 4 , 8 , 9 , 14 , 15 , 17 , 18 , 23 ). The reasons include the following: (i) HIB irradiation relies on large scientific devices, and cell suspension often needs to be transported to the laboratory after irradiation ( 4 , 9 , 14 , 15 ); (ii) there are a series of strict procedures for bacterial or fungal suspension from irradiation dish to coating to solid plate ( 18 ); and (iii) as a valuable experimental resource, HIB irradiation is usually designed not for the sole purpose of determining SF, but for a series of parallel and series experimental tasks ( 4 , 8 , 9 , 14 , 15 , 17 , 23 ). This fact means that the observed SF may be obviously dependent on time and will fluctuate according to certain rules over time. Therefore, verifying the objective existence of time dependence of dose-SF observation value and quantitatively describing the mathematical law of its change with time will help to evaluate the dose-survival effect more accurately, enhance the comparability among different independent works, and finally advance environmental and applied microbial studies using HIB radiation, including damage repair mechanisms and mutation breeding practices ( 3 , 5 ). For relevant works based on other physical and chemical mutagens, although ensuring the timeliness of SF determination is not as challenging as that of HIB irradiation-based studies, the mechanisms involved and the resulting consequences are consistent, which is still very worthy of attention.

In this study, we carried out two aspects of work. First, we investigated the time dependence of the observed SF for HIB-irradiated S. cerevisiae based on the establishment of an accurate and rapid dose-SF measurement method. An alternative approach was attempted in which irradiation treatment and SF measurement were conducted in normal saline (oligotrophic state) to slow down the time-dependent fluctuation of observed SF caused by unbalanced proliferation rates between control and irradiation treatment groups. The cells were then transferred to the YPD medium (eutrophic state) to complete the process of damage repair-mutation, creating a mutant library for subsequent strain breeding. For the alternative, we intend to confirm how long the irradiated microbial cells can last in the oligotrophic state without causing repair failure of sublethal cells and an eventual decrease in viable cells. In addition, we aim to investigate the dynamics of damage repair response in cells in the oligotrophic state and their transition to the eutrophic state at a molecular level. The answers to these two questions are very important for verifying the value of the alternative proposed because the DNA damage repair results directly determine the final mutation spectrum ( 17 , 24 – 26 ). Simultaneously, elucidating the dependence of radiation-induced damage repair on trophic states aids in understanding the fates of microbial organisms under complex environmental influences.

Accurate and rapid determination of SF based on Poisson distribution by 96-well microplate method

First, to ensure the accuracy of the SF determination and the timeliness of operation, we adopted the 96-well microplate method proposed in our previous study ( Fig. 2 ) ( 18 ). The basic idea actually borrowed the principle of quantitative template DNA by Droplet Digital PCR ( 28 , 29 ). Our previous research on methodology and the experimental results in this study show that this method is equally effective as the plate counting method. It accurately reflects the dose dependence of SF and yields results that are easily discernible to the naked eye. At the same time, the operation can be completed quickly using the 96-channel pipetting gun, which is instant.

Specifically, the relative numbers of surviving cells in cell suspension after different doses of irradiation were measured by the 96-well microplate method and plate counting method at the same time. It can be seen that the SFs measured by the 96-well microplate method were obviously dose dependent and were equivalent to the SFs measured by the plate counting method ( Fig. 3a ). The SFs obtained by the two methods can be well fitted linearly ( Fig. 3b ). The fitting parameters were Slope = 1.03049, Intercept = −0.0242, R 2 > 0.99. These data quantitatively indicate that the 96-well microplate method can replace the plate counting method to realize a rapid and accurate determination of the SF. In the aspect of the dose-survival effect, with the increase in irradiation dose, the SF showed an obvious downward trend; the 50% lethal dose of S. cerevisiae S288c was about 90 Gy, and the SF decreased to 22% after 210 Gy irradiation ( Fig. 3a ).

DISCUSSION

Previous studies have revealed that deterministic factors influencing the dose-survival effect induced by HIB irradiation include radiation quality, microbial type, and cellular intrinsic state ( 5 ). However, based on several experiments conducted at HIRFL, we have identified an uncertain factor that affects the observed SF under HIB irradiation: the measurement time after irradiation ( Fig. 1 ). This factor is inevitably derived from the determination of SF, and its essence lies in the biological effect of HIB irradiation ( 5 , 23 ). Proliferative death is an important form of microbial death after ionizing irradiation, so plate counting methods based on CFU or other derived methods are the gold standard for determining SF ( 18 , 21 , 22 ). One fact we must acknowledge is that it is nearly impossible for us to complete the plate coating at the first time (close to moment 0) after the irradiation treatment ( 4 , 8 , 9 , 14 , 15 , 17 , 18 , 23 ). If there is a delay in coating the plate with the cell suspension, the growth of irradiated cells will be halted during that time period due to cell cycle arrest, while the number of cells in the unirradiated control group will continue to increase at a normal rate of proliferation. The disproportionate proliferation over time between the irradiated group and the control group causes the denominator in the formula for calculating SF to be larger and the observed value of SF to be lower. However, after cell cycle arrest releases, the numerator suddenly increases, leading to a rise in the observed value of SF to some extent ( Fig. 5a ). This deduction is based on the important biological effect of cell cycle arrest induced by HIB irradiation. After HIB irradiation, once the cell cycle checkpoint senses DNA damage, it will stop the cell cycle to complete repair ( 18 – 21 ). In fact, cell cycle arrest and DNA damage response in microorganisms exist under various mutagenesis treatments, not limited to HIB irradiation mutagenesis ( 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 , 21 , 22 ). Almost all mutagenesis breeding work needs to consider the uncertain factor of time dependence for the observed SF. Therefore, our hypothesis has a strong theoretical foundation and apply to a wide range of mutagenic breeding practices. On this basis, to verify the experimental phenomenon and theory, we established eutrophic and oligotrophic culture conditions to uncover the time-dependent dynamic changes of observed SF after HIB irradiation and its underlying reasons. The results showed that the observed SF decreased at first and then rose when the HIB-irradiated cells underwent the damage repair process under eutrophic culture condition ( Fig. 4b ). This phenomenon was conservative among various doses ( Fig. 6 ). However, in oligotrophic state, the observed SF decreased slowly over time, with the decrease being less than 10% within the first 120 minutes ( Fig. 4d ). The main reason for this distinct trend is that the proliferation of the control group was also stagnant under oligotrophic culture condition. However, if the plate coating cannot be carried out within a long time (more than 120 minutes), the damaged oligotrophic cells will not be able to reach the YPD plate (complete medium) in time and be effectively repaired, and the sublethal cells may be induced to inactivate, leading to a significant decrease in the observed SF ( Fig. 4d ). In conclusion, our study suggests that the timing of SF determination after HIB irradiation is a crucial factor affecting the observed SF (based on clone formation ability) of S. cerevisiae in a eutrophic state ( Fig. 1, 4 and 5 ). The time dependence of the observed SF is mainly reflected in the obvious decrease at first and then increase. In an oligotrophic state, the time-dependent fluctuation of the observed SF can be obviously weakened within a certain time range ( Fig. 4 and 5 ). These results will prompt researchers to focus on and respond to the phenomenon of fluctuation of SF observation with detection timing, either by providing measurement time or by completing measurement experiments promptly, thereby enhancing the reference value of related works and the comparability between different works. Furthermore, we fitted the mathematical model based on the experimental data and obtained a good goodness of fit, which enhanced the predictability of the time-dependent SF observation.

According to our experimental results, the time dependence of the observed value of SF in response to HIB irradiation can be significantly reduced by irradiating and maintaining S. cerevisiae cells in an oligotrophic state and then measuring the SF within 120 minutes ( Fig. 4d and 5b ). Therefore, performing HIB irradiation and SF measurement in the oligotrophic state, and transferring cells to the eutrophic state to complete the damage repair process may be an effective alternative. This will also improve the flexibility of the experiment of measuring SF and facilitate a series of other experimental tasks in parallel and series after HIB irradiation ( 4 , 8 , 9 , 14 , 15 , 17 , 23 ). However, the use of cell suspensions irradiated in an oligotrophic state and subsequently maintained for a specific duration in the subsequent mutant screening is very important ( 4 , 9 , 14 , 15 ). The key question, therefore, is whether shifting the cell population to a eutrophic state for damage repair-mutation processes after both irradiation and SF measurement in an oligotrophic state will affect population mutation. Because mutation originates from wrong damage repair, and DNA repair is the premise of mutation ( 7 , 17 , 23 – 26 ), we evaluated the patterns of damage repair at the transcriptional level when cells were in an oligotrophic state continuously and after transitioning from oligotrophic state to a eutrophic state.

When S. cerevisiae is irradiated with HIB, its key target molecule DNA is damaged in various forms ( 17 , 23 , 36 ). Usually, single-site damage is relatively easy to repair, while the repair of clustered damages involves multiple repair mechanisms ( 7 , 36 , 37 ). In this study, the DEGs related to damage repair under the two culture conditions are both involved in pathways such as HRR, NHEJ, MR, BER, and NER ( Fig. 7 to 10 ). This result indicates that multiple pathways coordinate with each other to repair the corresponding DNA damage. Previous studies on HIB irradiation-induced damage repair have highlighted the HRR and NHEJ pathways for repairing DSBs ( 7 , 17 , 23 ). However, we observed many upregulated genes in the MR, BER, and NER pathways when the cells were in an oligotrophic state ( Fig. 7a and 8A ). Particularly, the enrichment degree of the MR pathway in the early stage of the repair process in the oligotrophic state was found to be quite high ( Fig. 8A ). The enrichment of the MR pathway in response to HIB irradiation may be attributed to several factors. First, MMR is a conserved DNA repair pathway from bacteria to eukaryotes, capable of repairing DNA damage such as DNA base mismatches, fragment insertions or deletions, loop formations, and DNA structural abnormalities caused by various factors ( 37 ). Second, MMR is also considered an important candidate for the BER pathway ( 38 ). In addition, MMR proteins play a role in DNA damage signal transmission, cell cycle regulation, meiosis, and mitosis ( 36 – 38 ). Furthermore, according to KEGG annotation, there is an intersection between proteins from MMR and other repair pathways ( 21 , 23 ).

As for the HRR and NHEJ pathways for repairing DSB, our research obtained some important details. When irradiated cells were in the oligotrophic state, HRR gradually enriched ( Fig. 8A ), while in the eutrophic state, HRR was highly enriched and experienced peak value ( Fig. 8B ). This result highlights the importance of HRR in S. cerevisiae responding to HIB irradiation. Based on the unique physical characteristics, DSB is the main form of DNA damage induced by HIB irradiation ( 7 , 17 , 23 ). It is generally believed that NHEJ plays a leading role in the repair of DSB in higher eukaryotes, while HRR is mainly used in lower eukaryotes such as S. cerevisiae ( 5 , 36 ). HRR operates under the strict and orderly regulation of multiple protein molecules or protein complexes. The processes of HRR were as follows: (i) DNA damage site processing: MRE11 cleaves the end of DNA break in the direction of 5′→ 3′, exposing the end of 3′ single-stranded DNA, which is then combined with RAD52. RAD52 protects the end of DNA from degradation and then combines with RPA to form a stable single-stranded precursor ( 32 , 39 ); (ii) Chain intrusion: RAD51 plays an important role in this stage, catalyzing homologous sequence search, chain pairing, and chain exchange ( 32 , 34 ); (iii) Formation and dissociation of Holliday junction: the complexes recognize homologous DNA templates, catalyze the pairing and extension of DNA strands, form Holliday junctions, complete the strand exchange process, and then the Holliday junctions are cleaved by nucleases and ligated by ligases, resulting in the disintegration of the Holliday junctions and the formation of complete double-stranded DNA molecules ( 40 ). The second damaged chain can be repaired by secondary recombination or a new complementary chain can be synthesized using the replaced chain as a template ( 36 ). Regarding the HRR pathway, the DEGs we revealed encode important nodal proteins. RFA1 and RFA2, as two subunits of RPA ( 41 ), their encoding genes were upregulated in the repair process under continuous oligotrophic state, while only gene rfa2 was upregulated in the eutrophic state ( Fig. 7c ). RAD51, as the core protein of HRR, has been revealed to be radiation sensitive ( 32 , 34 , 41 ). Its encoding gene was upregulated in both trophic states ( Fig. 7c ). However, the expression level of rad51 increased sharply during the repair process in eutrophic state, and the highest expression level was observed at 30 minutes compared with all other time points in two states ( Fig. 10B ). On the one hand, it is related to the full activation of repair proteins and the rapid advancement of repair process in eutrophic state ( 7 , 23 , 36 , 42 ). On the other hand, the sequence environment formed by very active replication activities is more conducive to HRR. When repairing DSB by the HRR pathway, it is necessary to have the same sequence between damaged DNA and undamaged DNA, and the undamaged DNA molecule is used as a template, among which sister chromatid is the first choice ( 36 ). It is worth noting that for oligotrophic states with inactive replication activity, more HRR-related genes were observed to be expressed above the threshold of differential expression than those in eutrophic states, and HRR was gradually enriched ( Fig. 7 and 8 ). This phenomenon may be mainly due to the following reasons: the repair process was still in the early stage under oligotrophic culture condition; in the oligotrophic state, there was still a considerable proportion of cells in S and G2/M phases, which were radiation sensitive and had a sequence environment conducive to HRR ( 5 , 36 ). In addition, HRR may repair DSB through repetitive sequences between non-alleles, which is widely recognized in eukaryotes ( 5 , 7 , 37 , 43 ). For example, single-strand annealing (SSA) derived from the classical HRR pathway does not use homologous chromosomes or sister chromatids but only relies on annealing and pairing repeated sequences with each other. SSA involves the loss of genetic information and is an error-prone repair process ( 5 , 7 , 42 , 43 ). The DEGs annotated in the HRR pathway also include rad54 and its homologous gene rdh54 . These genes encode proteins that act on superhelical DNA as a DNA recombination/repair translocation enzyme, promoting DNA strand opening and stimulating strand exchange by altering the topology of double-stranded DNA ( 33 , 36 ). Both rad54 and rdh54 were observed to be upregulated in the persistent oligotrophic state, and only rad54 was highly expressed in the eutrophic state ( Fig. 7c ).

Another important pathway to repair DSB is NHEJ. As a classical homology-independent pathway, it only involves the arrangement of one to several complementary bases, and the DNA ends are connected by protein-DNA complexes ( 7 ). Therefore, NHEJ can occur in the whole life cycle without cell cycle dependence ( 5 , 36 ). The decision to employ NHEJ or HRR for DSB repair is influenced not only by the phase of the cell cycle but also by the characteristic of the DNA ends generated through strand breaks and the affinity of Ku70/80 for NHEJ and RAD52 for HR to bind at these DNA termini ( 7 , 32 , 36 ). The enrichment of NHEJ was always lower than that of HRR in the two trophic states investigated ( Fig. 7 and 8 ). This trend aligns with previous studies suggesting that lower eukaryotes like S. cerevisiae mainly primarily utilize HRR for repairing DSBs ( 5 , 36 ). In addition, different upregulated genes in the NHEJ pathway were observed under two culture conditions. In the oligotrophic state, the highly expressed NHEJ gene was rad27 , and its encoded protein as DNA structure-specific endonuclease FEN-1 participated in the terminal processing of DSB connected by DNL4/LIF1 ( 30 , 31 ). The highly expressed lif1 in the eutrophic state encodes components of the DNA ligase IV complex ( Fig. 7d ) ( 31 ). It can be seen that the repair process in the oligotrophic state was in the upstream stage of the NHEJ pathway, while in the eutrophic state it was in the downstream stage. Our comparisons of repair dynamics at the molecular level in different trophic states offered valuable insights into DNA damage repair of S. cerevisiae in response to HIB irradiation.

It can be concluded that the cells actively promote the process of damage repair in an oligotrophic state. The specific manifestations include the following: (i) A high number of highly expressed repair-related genes were observed during the repair process under oligotrophic culture conditions, peaking at 70 minutes ( Fig. 7a ). (ii) For simple DNA damage which is easy to repair, the number of highly expressed genes in MR, NER, and BER pathways decreased at 170 minutes ( Fig. 7a and 8A ). (3) For rad51 and rad54 , key genes for repairing complex DNA damage, although significant expression peaks (2–4 times higher than controls) were observed only after the transition to a eutrophic state, their expression levels also exceeded the threshold for high expression in an oligotrophic state ( Fig. 10B ). This level of upregulation, relative to unirradiated cells, remains reliable even when excluding fluctuations of approximately 20% as indicated by RT-qPCR and RNA-seq comparisons ( Fig. 10D ). This observation further supports the notion that cells actively responded to DNA damage even in an oligotrophic environment ( 4 ). The succession of gene enrichment patterns indicated a shift in focus from easy-to-repair DNA damage to complex DNA damage as the repair process advances ( Fig. 8A ) ( 7 , 23 , 35 – 37 , 42 ).

However, when comparing the DNA repair processes in the oligotrophic state and eutrophic state, it can be found that the repair process in the oligotrophic state was obviously delayed, while the repair in the eutrophic state progressed rapidly ( Fig. 7 to 10 ). In the eutrophic state, the highly expressed repair-related genes were mainly those from HRR and NHEJ that repair DSB, although the detection began at 30 minutes. This result is consistent with previous report ( 23 ). At the same time, these two pathways were highly enriched in the whole repair process. This phenomenon means that the genes of MR, NER, and BER pathways for repairing simple DNA damage have completed their mission within 30 minutes in the eutrophic state. However, under oligotrophic culture condition, a high number of upregulated genes related to damage repair were unexpectedly observed ( Fig. 7 to 10 ), and some of these genes were not detected in the previous and current damage repair processes in the eutrophic state, although the time series of detection began 30 minutes or earlier ( 21 , 23 ). At the same time, half of the highly expressed genes came from MR, NER, and BER pathways, which mainly repair simple DNA damage ( 17 , 35 – 38 ), and the number of these genes drops after the peak ( Fig. 7a and 8A ). The number of DEGs from HRR and NHEJ pathways that repair complex DNA damage was always at a high level in the repair process under oligotrophic culture condition ( Fig. 7a and 8A ). The KEGG enrichment patterns also reflected that MR, NER, and BER pathways changed from high to low enrichment, while HRR and NHEJ changed from low to high enrichment ( Fig. 8A ). In addition, the role analysis of highly expressed genes showed that compared with eutrophic state, the highly expressed genes of HRR and NHEJ pathways observed in oligotrophic state were more comprehensive or located upstream of the corresponding pathways ( Fig. 7c and d ). Notably, although these genes responsible for repairing complex DSBs were expressed above the threshold for differential expression in the oligotrophic state, they did not exhibit high expression peaks as cells transitioned into the eutrophic state ( Fig. 10B ). Previous studies have proposed that cells will go through a “fast repair” stage and a “slow repair” stage after HIB irradiation ( 36 ). Most of the DNA damages were repaired in the fast-repair stage, which was completed in a short time. After that, it entered the slow-repair stage, which mainly repaired complex DNA damage, such as DSB and clustered damage, which was also the main reason for cell cycle arrest ( 7 , 20 , 23 , 36 , 42 ). In this study, under oligotrophic conditions, the number of upregulated genes involved in the repair of simple DNA damage in irradiated cells peaked before subsequently decreasing, while the upregulated genes responsible for repairing DSBs did not exhibit significant peaks in either quantity or expression. Conversely, in eutrophic conditions, a limited number of upregulated genes associated with DSB repair were observed, with core genes exhibiting substantial expression peaks (2–4 times) or consistently high expression levels ( Fig. 7–10 ). By combining the gene expression patterns observed in the eutrophic and oligotrophic states, it can be conservatively concluded that we observed the characteristics of damage repair in the fast-repair stage in the oligotrophic state, while the eutrophic state has entered the slow-repair stage.

Our dynamic analysis of repair-related transcription profiles shows that cells, whether in an oligotrophic state or transitioning from an oligotrophic state to a eutrophic state, will actively mobilize the appropriate DNA repair pattern to facilitate the damage repair post-HIB irradiation. Specifically, when the cells are in an oligotrophic state, although the damage repair process is delayed, it is still ongoing. This result is undoubtedly beneficial for us to adopt alternative schemes to reduce the time dependence of SF while minimizing interference with the damage repair-mutation effect. Our quantitative results on the viable cell numbers at different time points of the oligotrophic repair process also provide strong evidence. When the duration of the oligotrophic state was controlled within 120 minutes, the number of surviving cells would not be affected after being transferred to the complete medium of the solid plate. This means that the effect of the oligotrophic state on DNA repair within 120 minutes is reversible. When the duration reached 170 minutes, the number of surviving cells decreased, indicating that some cells activated the death pathway when not effectively repaired over an extended period. Thus, the fate of cells will be irreversibly affected when the duration of the oligotrophic state is too long.

Conclusion

This study, based on several HIB irradiation experiments, multiple validations, model deduction, and function fitting, reveals that the observed SF of S. cerevisiae cells irradiated by HIB is time dependent, which is an uncertain factor that has not been considered in previous studies. According to the current and alternative schemes, the comparison of the time-dependent patterns of the observed SF between different trophic conditions leads to the following conclusions: when the irradiated cells are in a eutrophic state, the change in the observed SF with time follows a quadratic function, initially decreasing and then increasing. By contrast, in an oligotrophic state, the time dependence of the observed SF is diminished, with the changes described by an exponential function. The trend is relatively flat with minimal changes during the initial phase, followed by a monotonous decrease after 120 minutes. The reason for this phenomenon is that the HIB-irradiated group experienced cycle arrest under eutrophic culture condition, while the control group proliferated rapidly, resulting in an over-time disproportionate change in viable cell counts between groups. However, the cell proliferations in both irradiated and control groups are limited under oligotrophic culture conditions. To assess whether the alternative scheme—completing irradiation and SF measurement in an oligotrophic state and transferring to a eutrophic state for further repair—affects the damage repair-mutation pattern of the irradiated population, we investigated the dynamic transcription profiles across different trophic states, extracting the succession information on DNA repair. The findings indicate that cells, regardless of being in an oligotrophic or eutrophic state, actively adjust their damage repair patterns to enhance the repair process. Notably, the impact of the oligotrophic state on damage repair and cell fate is reversible within the first 120 minutes, despite causing a delay in the repair process. These results suggest that we can irradiate cells in an oligotrophic state, measure SF immediately, and transfer them to a eutrophic state to complete the repair-mutation process. This approach reduces the time dependence of the observed SF and minimizes the impact on the damage repair-mutation effect in cells.

Furthermore, all physical and chemical mutagens introduce DNA damage and induce cell cycle arrest. Thus, the time dependence of the observed SF is a common issue in various microbial mutation breeding works, and our conclusions possess broad applicability. In addition, the oligotrophic state we set delayed the process of damage repair, and its comparison with the eutrophic state enabled us to observe more details of DNA damage repair, including the fast-repair stage. The influence of trophic states on the DNA damage response of microbial cells was also highlighted. Regardless of the employed methods or the resulting findings, this study is anticipated to provide valuable insights for related research on the damage-repair-mutation effects induced by HIB radiation or other complex environmental factors.
