---
pmid: '18936097'
title: The tumor marker human placental protein 11 is an endoribonuclease.
authors:
- Laneve P
- Gioia U
- Ragno R
- Altieri F
- Di Franco C
- Santini T
- Arceci M
- Bozzoni I
- Caffarelli E
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3259861
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805759200
---

# The tumor marker human placental protein 11 is an endoribonuclease.
**Authors:** Laneve P, Gioia U, Ragno R, Altieri F, Di Franco C, Santini T, Arceci M, Bozzoni I, Caffarelli E
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M805759200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M805759200)
**PMC:** [PMC3259861](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3259861/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 12;283(50):34712-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805759200. Epub
2008  Oct 20.

The tumor marker human placental protein 11 is an endoribonuclease.

Laneve P(1), Gioia U, Ragno R, Altieri F, Di Franco C, Santini T, Arceci M, 
Bozzoni I, Caffarelli E.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Biologia e Patologia Molecolari, Consiglio Nazionale delle 
Ricerche, Sapienza Università di Roma, Rome, Italy.

Human PP11 (placental protein 11) was previously described as a serine protease 
specifically expressed in the syncytiotrophoblast and in numerous tumor tissues. 
Several PP11-like proteins were annotated in distantly related organisms, such 
as worms and mammals, suggesting their involvement in evolutionarily conserved 
processes. Based on sequence similarity, human PP11 was included in a protein 
family whose characterized members are XendoU, a Xenopus laevis endoribonuclease 
involved in small nucleolar RNA processing, and Nsp15, an endoribonuclease 
essential for coronavirus replication. Here we show that the bacterially 
expressed human PP11 displays RNA binding capability and cleaves single stranded 
RNA in a Mn(2+)-dependent manner at uridylates, to produce molecules with 
2',3'-cyclic phosphate ends. These features, together with structural and 
mutagenesis analyses, which identified the potential active site residues, 
reveal striking parallels to the amphibian XendoU and assign a ribonuclease 
function to PP11. This newly discovered enzymatic activity places PP11-like 
proteins in a completely new perspective.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M805759200
PMCID: PMC3259861
PMID: 18936097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Human PP11 (placental protein 11) was previously described as a serine
 protease specifically expressed in the syncytiotrophoblast and in numerous
 tumor tissues. Several PP11-like proteins were annotated in distantly related
 organisms, such as worms and mammals, suggesting their involvement in
 evolutionarily conserved processes. Based on sequence similarity, human PP11
 was included in a protein family whose characterized members are XendoU, a Xenopus laevis endoribonuclease involved in small nucleolar RNA
 processing, and Nsp15, an endoribonuclease essential for coronavirus
 replication. Here we show that the bacterially expressed human PP11 displays
 RNA binding capability and cleaves single stranded RNA in a
 Mn 2+ -dependent manner at uridylates, to produce molecules with
 2′,3′-cyclic phosphate ends. These features, together with
 structural and mutagenesis analyses, which identified the potential active
 site residues, reveal striking parallels to the amphibian XendoU and assign a
 ribonuclease function to PP11. This newly discovered enzymatic activity places
 PP11-like proteins in a completely new perspective.

RESULTS

PP11 Has No Detectable Serine Protease Activity —PP11 was
 previously isolated, thanks to its high levels of expression in the
 syncytiotrophoblast. We cloned a full-length PP11 cDNA fused to a His tag and
 purified the expressed 42-kDa protein in E. coli (His-PP11). In
 parallel, antibodies against the recombinant protein were generated, purified
 by affinity chromatography, tested on placental and BeWo cell protein
 extracts, and employed for immunofluorescence studies. These analyses
 indicated that the antibodies specifically recognized the His-PP11 protein as
 well as the two forms of the placental protein and confirmed the reported
 abundant expression of PP11 in syncytiotrophoblast
 ( 7 ) (supplemental Fig. 1).

Our previous PP11 homology modeling did not reveal any evidence for a
 catalytic triad that could account for its putative serine protease activity;
 the residues His 162 , Ser 157 , and Glu 161 (or
 Asp 156 ) tend to cluster, but their stereochemistry does not conform
 to the canonical triad ( 9 ).

To unequivocally establish PP11 enzymatic activity as a protease and/or as
 esterase, the recombinant protein was employed in the amidolytic assay
 described by Grundmann et al. ( 6 ). The level of protease
 activity was undetectable by chromogenic assay on Chromozyme TH at all of the
 protein concentrations tested ( Fig.
 1 ). Supporting this result, no amidase activity was observed using
 glycine p -nitroanilide as substrate (not shown). A very low
 hydrolytic activity (less than 0.002 μmol min –1 mg –1 ) was observed toward p -nitrophenyl acetate,
 indicating its preferential esterase activity
 ( Fig. 1 ).

PP11 Homology Modeling —The sequence and secondary structure
 conservation of PP11 with XendoU endoribonuclease suggests an RNase activity
 for the human protein ( 9 , 12 ).

To support this prediction, we performed a homology-modeling analysis on
 PP11, based on the XendoU crystallographic structure
 ( 9 ). Two three-dimensional
 models were automatically generated, employing two of the most widely used
 publicly available homology model Web servers, namely the Swiss-Model
 ( 21 ) and the HHpred
 ( 22 ). Both of the homology
 model servers identified the experimental three-dimensional structure of
 XendoU (Protein Data Bank code 2c1w) as the most appropriate template, with an
 identity sequence score of about 40%. The two homology models were quite
 superimposable (root mean square deviation = 0.532 over 168 residue pairs),
 except for a flap region, located between Gly 248 and
 Asn 260 (corresponding to Gly 166 –Asn 179 in XendoU) that is endowed with a certain flexibility. Inspection of the two
 models in comparison with the experimental three-dimensional structure of the
 template highlighted that the HHpred-derived PP11 model conserved the flap
 region in an open position, whereas the Swiss-model PP11 structure displayed a
 closed switched flap ( Fig. 2, a and b , and supplemental Fig. 2).

In XendoU, the flap is kept opened by a hydrogen bonding net established
 between the side chains of Glu 167 , Gln 172 , and
 Lys 220 (supplemental Fig. 3); such a flap region was detected to
 accommodate a phosphate group in XendoU experimental structure, suggesting
 this as the putative RNA binding site
 ( 9 ). In the modeled PP11, only
 the Glu 249 residue, corresponding to the XendoU-Glu 167 residue, is conserved, whereas counterparts of XendoU-Gln 172 and
 -Lys 220 change to Lys 254 and Asp 298 ,
 respectively; as a consequence, the absence of the hydrogen bonding network
 could explain the enhanced flexibility of the PP11
 Gly 248 -Asn 260 loop (supplemental Figs. 3 and 4). These
 modeling data allow us to speculate that the HHpred structural model
 represents the active state of the PP11 enzyme in which a putative RNA-binding
 domain can be recognized. We employed this structural model for further
 inspection of the possible enzyme/substrate interactions.

PP11 Interacts with RNA —The ability of the protein to
 interact with a RNA substrate was tested by in vitro binding assays.
 For this purpose, increased concentrations of His-PP11 were incubated with a
 fixed amount of 32 P-labeled mini 003 RNA that represents a short
 version of the XendoU natural substrate
 ( 12 ); we chose this molecule,
 since it displays the appropriate length, allowing the formation of stable
 RNA-protein complexes. The assembled complex was visualized by an
 electrophoretic mobility shift assay ( Fig.
 3 A ). In order to exclude the possibility that the His tag
 contributed to the RNA binding activity of PP11, a control binding experiment
 with an unrelated His tag fusion protein (acetyl-CoA synthetase) with no
 reported affinity for nucleic acids was performed. Only a very minor
 nonspecific interaction was detected, summing up to no more than 2% of input
 RNA (supplemental Fig. 5).

The substrate affinity of PP11 and XendoU toward RNA was determined by
 measuring the apparent dissociation constant ( K d ′).
 The estimated K d ′ was equal to 140 n m for
 PP11 and 920 n m for XendoU, suggesting a higher RNA affinity for
 the human protein compared with the Xenopus enzyme
 ( Fig. 3 B ).

RNA-protein interaction was further investigated through docking
 experiments, conducted by means of the Autodock program,
 ( 23 ), using the HHpred PP11
 modeled structure. For such an experiment, we employed the sequence
 corresponding to the oligoribonucleotide P1 (GGAACGUAUCCUUUGGGAG) that
 contains a natural cleavage site of XendoU
 ( 11 ).

At first, two secondary structures of the oligoribonucleotide (supplemental
 Fig. 6) were generated, as suggested by the mfold program
 ( 19 ). The predicted stem-loop
 structural motifs present in both secondary structures were selected to
 produce RNA1 (GAACGUAU; supplemental Fig. 6, left ) and RNA2
 (CCUUUGGG; supplemental Fig. 6, right ) three-dimensional models by
 the Mc-Sym program ( 24 ).

The Autodock-suggested RNA1-PP11 and RNA2-PP11 complexes (supplemental Fig.
 7), although not overlapping each other, are relatively near to the flexible
 flap and close to the phosphate residue experimentally found in the XendoU
 structure ( 9 ). These results
 suggest that the PP11 Gly 248 –Asn 260 loop region is
 involved in RNA binding.

PP11 Has an Endoribonuclease Activity —To investigate the
 RNase activity of PP11, a collection of synthetic oligoribonucleotides was
 employed. All of them derived from P1, the oligonucleotide containing the UUU
 upstream distal cleavage site of XendoU; they are P2, P3, and P4, in which the
 UUU stretch is substituted by UU, UCU, and UGU sequences, respectively (see Fig. 4 )
 ( 11 ). These molecules
 represent suitable substrates for testing both the ribonucleolytic activity
 and the sequence specificity of the enzyme.

The processing assay consisted in the incubation of the affinity-purified
 His-PP11 with 32 P-labeled oligoribonucleotides under the conditions
 already set up for XendoU activity
 ( 11 ). The reaction was carried
 out in the presence of manganese both at 24 °C, the temperature utilized
 for XendoU activity assay, and at 37 °C; since no differences were
 detected (not shown), all of the following assays were performed at 24 °C. Fig. 4 shows that His-PP11
 cleavages occur 5′ of uridylates. The UU and GU sites (marked by long arrows in Fig. 4 , bottom ) are more efficiently cleaved than CU and AU sites (marked by short arrows ). Nevertheless, this seems not to be a rigid rule, since
 UA and UC (marked by arrowheads ) are also cleaved with a 12-fold
 lower efficiency, thus representing minor cleavage sites. Interestingly, all
 of the cleavage sites map in a putative single-stranded RNA structure, as
 predicted by the mfold program ( Fig.
 4 , bottom ). As a proof of concept, we experimentally
 demonstrated that the enzyme is unable to process double-stranded RNA
 ( Fig. 4 , lane dsRNA ).
 In addition, using 32 P-labeled deoxyoligonucleotides, cleavage
 activity on DNA substrates was excluded as well (not shown).

Processing experiments were also performed in the presence of increasing
 substrate concentration. The results show that PP11 displays a saturable
 activity, with saturation occurring at comparable substrate/enzyme
 concentration (supplemental Fig. 8).

Docking experiments were extended to the GU and UU preferred cleavage
 dinucleotides; both of them were located in the corresponding XendoU phosphate
 binding region ( 9 )
 (supplemental Fig. 9). The different orientation of the two dinucleotides may
 reflect the above reported enzyme binding site flexibility.

His-PP11 activity was further investigated by analyzing the ion dependence
 of cleavage; Fig. 5 A shows that only Mn 2+ ions trigger the RNase activity, whereas all
 the other examined ions (Mg 2+ , Cd 2+ , Co 2+ ,
 Cu 2+ , Ni 2+ , Zn 2+ , and Pb 2+ ) were
 not effective.

Finally, the chemistry of His-PP11 cleavage was determined by analyzing the
 nature of the 3′ termini in the cleaved products. For this purpose, the
 major “e” product, generated by His-PP11 cleavage on P1
 oligoribonucleotide, was gel-purified and ligated to
 5′-[ 32 P]pCp directly or after alkaline phosphatase or kinase
 treatment. The first enzyme removes the linear phosphate group, whereas the
 second one specifically removes the 2′,3′-cyclic phosphate
 ( 18 ). As shown in Fig. 5 B , the His-PP11
 cleavage product is labeled only after kinase treatment ( lane 2 ,
 “ e ” molecule ), indicating that the 3′-end
 of the cleavage product carries a 2′,3′-cyclic phosphate. As
 control, the full-length P1 oligonucleotide underwent the same treatments
 ( Fig. 5 B , lanes
 P1 ).

Identification of Residues Involved in Ribonuclease
 Activity —To define the residues participating in the enzymatic
 activity, we undertook a site-directed mutagenesis analysis. For this aim, we
 first probed the role of three residues, two histidines and a lysine that are
 highly conserved in proteins of the XendoU family (His 162 ,
 His 178 , and Lys 224 in XendoU) and that were implicated
 in XendoU and Nsp15 catalytic activities
 ( 8 , 12 , 13 ); their replacement was not
 tolerated either in coronavirus
 ( 13 ) or in X. laevis enzymes ( 12 ). We also tested
 two additional glutamic acid residues that were indispensable for XendoU
 activity (Glu 161 and Glu 167 in XendoU).

The following collection of His-PP11 mutant derivatives was produced. Two
 Glu residues, Glu 243 and Glu 249 , were substituted by
 Gln, giving rise to the single mutants E243Q and E249Q; substitution of
 His 244 and His 259 by Ala produced the mutants H244A and
 H259A, respectively. Finally, Lys 302 was replaced by Ala, producing
 mutant K302A. The position of mutated residues in the PP11 homology model is
 reported in Fig. 2 .

His-PP11 mutant derivatives were expressed as recombinant proteins in
 bacterial cells and, as a preliminary step for standardization of the
 following processing experiments, the protein amount needed to bind a constant
 quantity of RNA was established. For this aim, a fixed quantity (20 ng) of the
 single proteins were incubated with 32 P-labeled mini 003 RNA
 substrate, and the percentage of shifted RNA was evaluated in a mobility shift
 assay. As shown in the histogram of Fig.
 6 A , we found that the wild type as well as almost all the
 mutant proteins were able to shift a comparable percentage of the input RNA
 (about 20%), displaying the same efficiency in RNA binding activity, with
 E243Q protein showing a higher affinity.

Based on these evaluations, specific amounts of wild type and mutant
 proteins, producing the same percentage of shifted RNA, were incubated with a
 constant amount of 32 P-labeled P1 oligoribonucleotide, and their
 processing activity was analyzed. As shown in Fig. 6 B , the mutants
 did not show any significant processing activity, with the mutant K302A
 displaying a slight residual activity. Such results indicate that each of the
 five residues is required for cleavage.

DISCUSSION

The “XendoU family” was proposed after the identification of
 several conserved viral proteins and was defined as a group of polypeptides
 with features as different as nucleases and proteases
 ( 8 , 9 ). The best characterized
 members, XendoU ( 11 ) and Nsp15
 ( 13 ), were defined as
 endoribonucleases playing a specific role in small RNA biogenesis in Xenopus laevis ( 10 , 11 , 25 ) and in the coronavirus
 replication cycle ( 13 ),
 respectively. However, XendoU homologs from distantly related organisms were
 instead annotated as putative serine proteases on the basis of their homology
 with PP11 (human placental protein 11), described to have such an enzymatic
 activity ( 6 ). Subsequent
 phylogenetic alignment and secondary structure prediction of protein family
 members, together with crystallographic determination of XendoU structure
 ( 9 ), highlighted the occurrence
 of a conserved region that can be arranged in a common architecture, which is
 crucial for XendoU endoribonucleolytic activity.

These data prompted us to reconsider the biochemical nature of the putative
 serine proteases belonging to the same family. We focused on human PP11 and
 started with a homology modeling, based on XendoU tridimensional structural
 data ( 9 ). Our results revealed,
 in a conserved loop spanning from residue Gly 248 to
 Asn 260 (corresponding to Gly 166 –Asn 179 in XendoU), a specific site characterized by high flexibility that, as
 underscored by oligoribonucleotide docking experiments, may represent a RNA
 binding site.

To verify the ability of PP11 to bind and, possibly, to cleave RNA
 molecules, we undertook its biochemical characterization. Our data indicate
 the absence of protease activity in the recombinant His-PP11 that, instead,
 behaves as a Mn 2+ -dependent, U-specific endoribonuclease. In this
 regard, we can suppose that the previously reported proteolytic activity,
 observed in the placental and in E. coli expressed proteins, was the
 result of contaminating activities originating from incomplete
 purification.

Overall, our results indicated that PP11 shares several biochemical
 features with the Xenopus and viral homologs: (i) they cleave RNA at
 uridylates, (ii) their activities are stimulated by Mn 2+ ions, and
 (iii) they release 2′,3′-cyclic phosphodiester ends.

Altogether, these characteristics provide biochemical evidence for
 considering human PP11 as part of the XendoU family, not only on the basis of
 sequence homology but also in terms of enzymatic activity.

The functional parallel between PP11 and XendoU was further explored by
 defining the amino acid residues relevant for His-PP11 catalysis.
 Site-directed mutagenesis allowed the identification of two histidines, two
 glutamic acids, and a lysine that are essential for RNA processing. Notably,
 all of them are included in the region that is highly conserved among all of
 the members of the XendoU family and that contains the residues involved in
 XendoU and Nsp15 catalytic activity
 ( 9 ). These data support the
 existence of a common domain, possibly shared by all the family members, that
 carries out a conserved RNA processing function. Comparative analysis of the
 PP11 structural model underscores the presence in the predicted RNA binding
 site of a loop more flexible than that of XendoU; this characteristic may
 account for the observed higher RNA affinity of PP11 and for its slightly
 different cleavage specificity.

Although the general enzymatic activity seems well defined for this class
 of proteins, more complicated is the definition of the variety of
 physiological functions in which they could participate. XendoU was previously
 described to be involved in the nuclear biosynthesis of small noncoding RNAs
 in X. laevis , whereas Nsp15 was defined to be essential for
 replication and transcription of human coronaviruses, responsible for
 respiratory disease, such as the common cold and severe acute respiratory
 syndrome ( 8 ). PP11 was isolated
 thanks to its high levels of expression in the syncitiotrophoblast and in
 several tumors, suggesting that in these cells, its function may be utilized
 for specialized/aberrant activities.

The syncytiotrophoblast is a placental tissue that derives from syncytial
 fusion of cytotrophoblast layers; the syncytialization involves the apoptotic
 cascade, and, as a consequence, fetal DNA and RNA can be detected in maternal
 blood ( 26 ). With regard to
 this very important process, PP11 could participate in cleavage followed by
 RNA degradation during the final stage of the apoptosis cascade
 ( 27 ). The RNase PP11 may also
 have a role in promoting tissue remodeling, a substantial feature of the
 trophoblast during all stages of pregnancy
 ( 28 ).

Since it has been postulated that the villous syncytiotrophoblast limits
 the transplacental transmission of viral pathogens
 ( 29 ), a further function can
 be postulated for PP11; through its RNA binding activity, it could recognize
 viral RNA genomes or mRNAs and trigger their degradation, participating in the
 defense mechanisms that preserve the fetus from viral infections during
 pregnancy. Detection of PP11 in several malignant cells
 ( 3 – 5 )
 can instead suggest that its deregulated expression may be associated with
 oncogenesis. In this regard, we find intriguing the parallel between the
 physiological expression of PP11 in syncytiotrophoblastic cells and its
 aberrant expression in tumoral cells; both cell types are characterized by the
 capacity to invade the adjacent tissues.

In conclusion, our data assign a new enzymatic function to a previously
 characterized protein; we demonstrated that PP11 does not have protease
 activity, whereas it displays RNA binding and hydrolytic activities.
 Furthermore, the correspondence of the XendoU/PP11 amino acid residues
 participating in RNase function and the localization, by docking experiments,
 of the preferred PP11 cleavage dinucleotides into the corresponding XendoU
 phosphate binding region ( 9 )
 highlights the evolutionary conservation of the catalytic/RNA binding site.
 Such conclusions, while opening new avenues of exploring PP11 biological
 roles, as well as the function of its homologs, through the identification of
 specific RNA substrates and binding partners, offer the chance to reconsider
 these proteins as important players in RNA metabolism.
