---
pmid: '17673620'
title: UHRF1 plays a role in maintaining DNA methylation in mammalian cells.
authors:
- Bostick M
- Kim JK
- Estève PO
- Clark A
- Pradhan S
- Jacobsen SE
journal: Science
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.1147939
---

# UHRF1 plays a role in maintaining DNA methylation in mammalian cells.
**Authors:** Bostick M, Kim JK, Estève PO, Clark A, Pradhan S, Jacobsen SE
**Journal:** Science (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1147939](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1147939)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2007 Sep 21;317(5845):1760-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1147939. Epub 2007
 Aug 2.

UHRF1 plays a role in maintaining DNA methylation in mammalian cells.

Bostick M(1), Kim JK, Estève PO, Clark A, Pradhan S, Jacobsen SE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Cell and Developmental Biology, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Epigenetic inheritance in mammals relies in part on robust propagation of DNA 
methylation patterns throughout development. We show that the protein UHRF1 
(ubiquitin-like, containing PHD and RING finger domains 1), also known as NP95 
in mouse and ICBP90 in human, is required for maintaining DNA methylation. UHRF1 
colocalizes with the maintenance DNA methyltransferase protein DNMT1 throughout 
S phase. UHRF1 appears to tether DNMT1 to chromatin through its direct 
interaction with DNMT1. Furthermore UHRF1 contains a methyl DNA binding domain, 
the SRA (SET and RING associated) domain, that shows strong preferential binding 
to hemimethylated CG sites, the physiological substrate for DNMT1. These data 
suggest that UHRF1 may help recruit DNMT1 to hemimethylated DNA to facilitate 
faithful maintenance of DNA methylation.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1147939
PMID: 17673620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
