---
pmid: '12923052'
title: Genetic interaction between Wnt/beta-catenin and BMP receptor signaling during
  formation of the AER and the dorsal-ventral axis in the limb.
authors:
- Soshnikova N
- Zechner D
- Huelsken J
- Mishina Y
- Behringer RR
- Taketo MM
- Crenshaw EB 3rd
- Birchmeier W
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2003'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC196251
doi: 10.1101/gad.263003
---

# Genetic interaction between Wnt/beta-catenin and BMP receptor signaling during formation of the AER and the dorsal-ventral axis in the limb.
**Authors:** Soshnikova N, Zechner D, Huelsken J, Mishina Y, Behringer RR, Taketo MM, Crenshaw EB 3rd, Birchmeier W
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.263003](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.263003)
**PMC:** [PMC196251](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC196251/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2003 Aug 15;17(16):1963-8. doi: 10.1101/gad.263003.

Genetic interaction between Wnt/beta-catenin and BMP receptor signaling during 
formation of the AER and the dorsal-ventral axis in the limb.

Soshnikova N(1), Zechner D, Huelsken J, Mishina Y, Behringer RR, Taketo MM, 
Crenshaw EB 3rd, Birchmeier W.

Author information:
(1)Max-Delbrück-Centrum for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 
13125Berlin, Germany.

By conditional gene ablation in mice, we found that beta-catenin, an essential 
downstream effector of canonical Wnt signaling, is a key regulator of formation 
of the apical ectodermal ridge (AER) and of the dorsal-ventral axis of the 
limbs. By generation of compound mutants, we also show that beta-catenin acts 
downstream of the BMP receptor IA in AER induction, but upstream or parallel in 
dorsal-ventral patterning. Thus, AER formation and dorsal-ventral patterning of 
limbs are tightly controlled by an intricate interplay between Wnt/beta-catenin 
and BMP receptor signaling.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.263003
PMCID: PMC196251
PMID: 12923052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Preparing to download ... HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
