---
pmid: '21220115'
title: Structural snapshots of full-length Jak1, a transmembrane gp130/IL-6/IL-6Rα
  cytokine receptor complex, and the receptor-Jak1 holocomplex.
authors:
- Lupardus PJ
- Skiniotis G
- Rice AJ
- Thomas C
- Fischer S
- Walz T
- Garcia KC
journal: Structure
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC3052743
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2010.10.010
---

# Structural snapshots of full-length Jak1, a transmembrane gp130/IL-6/IL-6Rα cytokine receptor complex, and the receptor-Jak1 holocomplex.
**Authors:** Lupardus PJ, Skiniotis G, Rice AJ, Thomas C, Fischer S, Walz T, Garcia KC
**Journal:** Structure (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2010.10.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2010.10.010)
**PMC:** [PMC3052743](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3052743/)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2011 Jan 12;19(1):45-55. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2010.10.010.

Structural snapshots of full-length Jak1, a transmembrane gp130/IL-6/IL-6Rα 
cytokine receptor complex, and the receptor-Jak1 holocomplex.

Lupardus PJ(1), Skiniotis G, Rice AJ, Thomas C, Fischer S, Walz T, Garcia KC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Comment in
    Structure. 2011 Jan 12;19(1):1-2. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2010.12.010.

The shared cytokine receptor gp130 signals as a homodimer or heterodimer through 
activation of Janus kinases (Jaks) associated with the receptor intracellular 
domains. Here, we reconstitute, in parts and whole, the full-length gp130 
homodimer in complex with the cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6), its alpha receptor 
(IL-6Rα) and Jak1, for electron microscopy imaging. We find that the full-length 
gp130 homodimer complex has intimate interactions between the trans- and 
juxtamembrane segments of the two receptors, appearing to form a continuous 
connection between the extra- and intracellular regions. 2D averages and 3D 
reconstructions of full-length Jak1 reveal a three lobed structure comprising 
FERM-SH2, pseudokinase, and kinase modules possessing extensive intersegmental 
flexibility that likely facilitates allosteric activation. Single-particle 
imaging of the gp130/IL-6/IL-6Rα/Jak1 holocomplex shows Jak1 associated with the 
membrane proximal intracellular regions of gp130, abutting the would-be inner 
leaflet of the cell membrane. Jak1 association with gp130 is enhanced by the 
presence of a membrane environment.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2010.10.010
PMCID: PMC3052743
PMID: 21220115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

Cytokine-induced homo- or hetero-dimerization of cell surface receptors is a ubiquitous signaling paradigm in higher eukaryotes ( Stroud and Wells, 2004 ; Wang et al., 2009 ). Cytokines of the four-helix bundle family are required for the growth and differentiation of nearly all cell types, but are particularly important for regulation of the immune and hematopoietic systems. Activation of signaling involves homo- or hetero-dimerization of two receptors by a single cytokine molecule, as first illustrated by Human Growth Hormone (HGH) in complex with its receptor (HGH-R)( de Vos et al., 1992 ). This dimerization event initiates activation of Janus kinases (Jaks) that are bound to the intracellular domains of the receptors ( Ihle, 1995 ). The active kinases then phosphorylate the C-terminal intracellular tails of the receptors on specific tyrosine residues, creating binding sites for pathway-associated signaling molecules such as STAT (signal transducer and activator of transcription) transcription factors which, upon phosphorylation by the active Jaks, translocate to the nucleus where they activate transcription of cytokine-responsive genes ( Leonard and O’Shea, 1998 ).

Gp130 serves as a shared signaling receptor for at least eight different cytokines, including IL-6, IL-11, IL-27, L eukemia I nhibitory F actor (LIF), O ncostatin- M (OSM), C iliary N eurotrophic F actor (CNTF), C ardio t rophin-1 (CT-1), and C ardiotrophin- l ike- c ytokine (CLC) ( Bravo and Heath, 2000 ; Wang et al., 2009 ). Gp130 has evolved a remarkable set of structural characteristics to facilitate shared signaling. First, gp130 has evolved cross-reactive cytokine binding sites that are structurally ideal for engaging a highly varied set of cytokines either alone (LIF, OSM) or with associated alpha receptor subunits (IL-6, IL-11, CNTF, CT-1, CLC) ( Boulanger et al., 2003a ; Boulanger and Garcia, 2004 ). Second, gp130 can homodimerize or heterodimerize with a second gp130 family receptor (LIFR, OSMR, TCCR) depending on the cytokine encountered ( Heinrich et al., 2003 ).

Homodimerization of gp130, which occurs in response to the cytokines IL-6 and IL-11, occurs in a three step fashion, with the cytokine first binding to a ligand-specific alpha receptor (site 1), followed by binding to gp130 to form the signaling-competent hexamer ( Boulanger et al., 2003b ; Chow et al., 2001 ) that is comprised of the membrane-distal “headpiece” and membrane-proximal “legs” ( Figure 1A ). An electron microscopy (EM) study of the complete extracellular domains of gp130 bound to IL6/IL6-Rα indicated a convergence of the membrane proximal D6 “leg” domains of gp130 ( Skiniotis et al., 2005 ). This finding was supported by a cryoelectron microscopic study of the IL-11/IL-11Rα/gp130 complex, where the legs also appeared to converge in a ring-like shape ( Matadeen et al., 2007 ). A subsequent EM study on the full-length gp130/LIF-R/CNTF complex, containing the TM segments and intracellular domains (ICDs), revealed a surprisingly intimate interaction between the extracellular juxtamembrane domains of gp130 and LIF-R ( Skiniotis et al., 2008 ). Finally, a recent crystal structure of a complete, but unliganded, gp130 extracellular domain showed that, consistent with the EM studies, the gp130 legs are kinked at the D4-D5 boundary, and as a result would bend inward towards one another within the dimeric complex ( Xu et al., 2010 ).

A critical piece of the puzzle to understand cytokine receptor signaling involves the Jak/Tyk family of intracellular kinases, which have remained enigmatic structurally ( Leonard and O’Shea, 1998 ; Schindler et al., 2007 ). The Jak/Tyk family consists of four members - Jak1, Jak2, Jak3, and Tyk2 - that are associated with cytokine receptors through a small membrane-proximal region of the ICD called the “Box 1/Box 2” ( Haan et al., 2006 ; Murakami et al., 1991 ). The Jaks are ~1200 amino acid proteins that are subdivided by sequence into seven Janus homology regions (JH1-7) which fold into four distinct domains ( Haan et al., 2006 ). The N-terminus consists of a FERM domain, which mediates the interaction with cytokine receptors, followed by an SH2-like domain and a pseudokinase domain that lacks catalytic activity, and finally the C-terminus is the active tyrosine kinase domain (KD). Several publications have suggested that Jak activation is regulated through inter-domain communication, such as between the FERM and KD, requiring conformational change during signaling ( Zhou et al., 2001 ). Further, disease-related mutations in Jaks have been speculated to interfere with the ability of Jak to undergo normal allosteric regulation ( Funakoshi-Tago et al., 2008 ; Zhou et al., 2001 ). However, although several isolated KD structures have been reported ( Boggon et al., 2005 ; Chrencik et al.; Lucet et al., 2006 ), little is known about the structure of intact Jak family members.

In this study, we capitalize on the characteristic shape of the “tall” gp130 extracellular regions to visualize the full-length receptor holocomplex by single particle EM. We reconstitute and image a receptor signaling complex including IL-6, IL-6Rα, gp130, and Jak1, both in isolation, and in complex with each other. The EM images indicate that the full-length gp130/IL-6/IL-6Rα ternary complex forms a well-defined, structurally stabilized assembly with the juxtamembrane and transmembrane domains in intimate contact upon ligand binding. Projection averages and three-dimensional reconstructions of Jak1 show it to be a three-lobed molecule with conformational flexibility that could, in principle, facilitate inter-domain communication. The holocomplex images suggest that homodimerization of gp130 by IL-6 locks the extracellular/transmembrane domains of gp130 together into a rod-like unit that can sensitively transduce a conformational signal through the plasma membrane to Jaks that are bound at the extreme juxtamembrane regions of the intracellular domains, likely interacting with the inner leaflet of the cell membrane.

Discussion

Our mechanistic understanding of communication between cytokine recognition and intracellular Jak/Tyk activation is poor compared to systems such as receptor Tyrosine Kinase s (RTK s), and Death receptors. The principal challenges to making progress on this problem have been the historic recalcitrance of Jak expression, and the difficulties posed by intact single-pass TM receptors for structural studies. Our strategy was to produce full-length Jak1 for EM analysis both alone and in complex with full-length gp130, and this has enabled us to report the first structural snapshots of Jak1, as well as of a fully “loaded” transmembrane receptor complex. While the mechanistic insight that can be gained from our studies is limited, the results we show here are informative on several levels. Our choice of gp130 was driven by its very characteristic extracellular structure by single-particle EM, which allows us to rapidly identify and orient particles. These studies demonstrate imaging of the cytokine receptor holocomplex is technically feasible, and that higher resolution imaging methodologies combined with nanodisc stabilization could lead to deeper mechanistic insights.
