---
pmid: '15044461'
title: Neuropathy target esterase and its yeast homologue degrade phosphatidylcholine
  to glycerophosphocholine in living cells.
authors:
- Zaccheo O
- Dinsdale D
- Meacock PA
- Glynn P
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M400830200
---

# Neuropathy target esterase and its yeast homologue degrade phosphatidylcholine to glycerophosphocholine in living cells.
**Authors:** Zaccheo O, Dinsdale D, Meacock PA, Glynn P
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M400830200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M400830200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 4;279(23):24024-33. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M400830200. Epub
2004  Mar 25.

Neuropathy target esterase and its yeast homologue degrade phosphatidylcholine 
to glycerophosphocholine in living cells.

Zaccheo O(1), Dinsdale D, Meacock PA, Glynn P.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Toxicology Unit and Department of Genetics, 
University of Leicester, Leicester LE1 9HN, United Kingdom.

Eukaryotic cells control the levels of their major membrane lipid, 
phosphatidylcholine (PtdCho), by balancing synthesis with degradation via 
deacylation to glycerophosphocholine (GroPCho). Here we present evidence that in 
both yeast and mammalian cells this deacylation is catalyzed by neuropathy 
target esterase (NTE), a protein originally identified by its reaction with 
organophosphates, which cause nerve axon degeneration. YML059c, a Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae protein with sequence homology to NTE, had similar catalytic 
properties to the mammalian enzyme in assays of microsome preparations and, like 
NTE, was localized to the endoplasmic reticulum. Yeast lacking YML059c were 
viable under all conditions examined but, unlike the wild-type strain, did not 
convert PtdCho to GroPCho. Despite the absence of the deacylation pathway, the 
net rate of [(14)C]choline incorporation into PtdCho in YML059c-null yeast was 
not greater than that in the wild type; this was because, in the null strain 
diminished net uptake of extracellular choline and decreased formation of the 
rate-limiting intermediate, CDP-choline, resulted in a reduced rate of PtdCho 
synthesis. In [(14)C]choline labeling experiments with cultured mammalian cell 
lines, production of [(14)C]GroPCho was enhanced by overexpression of 
catalytically active NTE and was diminished by reduction of endogenous NTE 
activity mediated either by RNA interference or organophosphate treatment. We 
conclude that NTE and its homologues play a central role in membrane lipid 
homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M400830200
PMID: 15044461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
