---
pmid: '18001825'
title: RNF8 transduces the DNA-damage signal via histone ubiquitylation and checkpoint
  protein assembly.
authors:
- Huen MS
- Grant R
- Manke I
- Minn K
- Yu X
- Yaffe MB
- Chen J
journal: Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC2149842
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.09.041
---

# RNF8 transduces the DNA-damage signal via histone ubiquitylation and checkpoint protein assembly.
**Authors:** Huen MS, Grant R, Manke I, Minn K, Yu X, Yaffe MB, Chen J
**Journal:** Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2007.09.041](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2007.09.041)
**PMC:** [PMC2149842](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2149842/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2007 Nov 30;131(5):901-14. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.09.041. Epub 2007
Nov  20.

RNF8 transduces the DNA-damage signal via histone ubiquitylation and checkpoint 
protein assembly.

Huen MS(1), Grant R, Manke I, Minn K, Yu X, Yaffe MB, Chen J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT 06520, USA.

DNA-damage signaling utilizes a multitude of posttranslational modifiers as 
molecular switches to regulate cell-cycle checkpoints, DNA repair, cellular 
senescence, and apoptosis. Here we show that RNF8, a FHA/RING domain-containing 
protein, plays a critical role in the early DNA-damage response. We have solved 
the X-ray crystal structure of the FHA domain structure at 1.35 A. We have shown 
that RNF8 facilitates the accumulation of checkpoint mediator proteins BRCA1 and 
53BP1 to the damaged chromatin, on one hand through the phospho-dependent FHA 
domain-mediated binding of RNF8 to MDC1, on the other hand via its role in 
ubiquitylating H2AX and possibly other substrates at damage sites. Moreover, 
RNF8-depleted cells displayed a defective G2/M checkpoint and increased IR 
sensitivity. Together, our study implicates RNF8 as a novel 
DNA-damage-responsive protein that integrates protein phosphorylation and 
ubiquitylation signaling and plays a critical role in the cellular response to 
genotoxic stress.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.09.041
PMCID: PMC2149842
PMID: 18001825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

Faithful duplication and segregation of DNA is essential to maintain genomic integrity during cell division. DNA lesions elicit a DNA damage response, which collectively includes DNA repair, activation of cell cycle checkpoints, chromatin remodeling, cellular senescence and apoptosis. Mutations in a variety of components involved in these cellular processes directly contribute to tumorigenesis ( Bartkova et al., 2005 ; Gorgoulis et al., 2005 ), highlighting the importance of these damage-induced signaling cascades in tumor suppression. Accumulating evidence suggests that the ATM/ATR-dependent phosphorylation of histone variant H2AX to create γH2AX is the initial signal for subsequent accumulation of various mediators/repair proteins to DNA lesions ( Bassing et al., 2003 ; Celeste et al., 2003 ). A positive feedback loop has been proposed in which ATM/ATR concentrates at γH2AX-containing double strand breaks via MDC1 to further phosphorylate adjacent H2AX molecules and amplify the DNA damage signal ( Lou et al., 2006 ; Stucki et al., 2005 ). Through this signal amplification step, a number of mediator/repair proteins, including BRCA1 and 53BP1, concentrate to sites of DNA damage to facilitate downstream checkpoint activation.

We and others have previously demonstrated that tandem BRCT domains serve as phospho-peptide binding motifs that mediate protein-protein interactions ( Manke et al., 2003 ; Yu et al., 2003 ). Specifically, a number of DNA damage response proteins, including BRCA1 and MDC1 ( Fernandez-Capetillo et al., 2002 ; Goldberg et al., 2003 ; Lou et al., 2003a ; Lou et al., 2003b ; Stewart et al., 2003 ), harbor BRCT domains that mediate binding to their respective partners in a phosphorylation-dependent manner ( Yu and Chen, 2004 ; Stucki et al., 2005 ). In addition to tandem BRCT domains, the FHA domain constitutes a separate class of phospho-peptide binding modules ( Durocher et al., 2000 ). Many FHA domain-containing proteins have been reported to play a role in DNA repair, cell cycle arrest, and pre-mRNA processing ( Sun et al., 1998 ; Li et al., 2000 ). The reversibility and sequence selectivity of ligand binding afforded by these and other phospho-peptide binding domain-containing proteins allows individual protein-protein interactions that control downstream responses to be tightly regulated in a stimulus-dependent manner.

Recent studies have provided additional insight into the phosphorylation-dependent regulation of the DNA damage signaling network. However, the detailed mechanisms by which the initial γH2AX signal at DNA lesions becomes propagated, amplified, and modified to concentrate checkpoint mediator proteins to these sites remains obscure. Here we report our study of an FHA and Ring domain-containing protein, RNF8, which serves as the molecular linker for communication between the protein phosphorylation and protein ubiquitylation pathways that are crucial for the activation and maintenance of the DNA damage response.

Discussion

In this study, we have uncovered a novel role of RNF8 in the DNA damage response. Our data strongly suggests that RNF8 channels the initial phosphorylation-dependent marks at DNA lesions to promote the accumulation of multiple checkpoint proteins, including Rap80, BRCA1 and 53BP1, which in turn, contribute to its putative role in maintaining genome integrity.

In eukaryotic cells where DNA is tightly packed, the chromatin structure impedes many of the activities that require access to the genetic materials. Despite our understanding of the roles of H2AX phosphorylation in the DNA damage response, it has only become evident recently that chromatin remodeling and other histone modifications also play important functions in this cellular process. Specifically, a role of the ATP-dependent chromatin-remodeling complexes, such as the INO80, SWR1, RSC, and SWI/SNF, and histone acetyltransferase complexes including Trrap-Tip60 complex have been implicated in DNA repair ( Murr et al., 2006 ; Tsukuda et al., 2005 ). However, unlike those catalysed by the Trrap-Tip60 complex, the impaired loading of DNA checkpoint proteins observed in RNF8-depleted cells could not be counteracted by pre-incubation with sodium butyrate, chloroquine or hypotonic solution (unpublished results). We hypothesize that RNF8 may be required for the accumulation of checkpoint/repair proteins via a different mechanism, i.e. ubiquitylating proteins at the sites of DNA breaks. Indeed, RNF8 is pivotal for the accumulation of ubiquitin conjugates at the damaged chromatin, which depended on its FHA and RING domains. In support of the role of RNF8 in protein ubiquitylation at sites of DNA breaks, we show that the phosphorylation-dependent RNF8 accumulation at γ-H2AX sites is responsible for the IR-induced H2AX di-ubiquitylation. The E3 ligase complex BRCA1-BARD1 has also been implicated to catalyse ubiquitin polymers at the damaged chromatin ( Morris and Solomon, 2004 ; Polanowska et al., 2006 ; Yu et al., 2006 ). However, unlike RNF8 and UBC13, BRCA1-depletion did not compromise the IR-induced H2AX ubiquitylation ( Supplementary Figure 6B ), suggesting that BRCA1 accumulates at the sites of DNA breaks subsequent to the RNF8/UBC13-dependent H2AX ubiquitylation following DNA damage. Finally, we found that ubiquitylation events catalysed by RNF8 is independent of H2AX K119 and K120, illustrating that these damage-induced H2AX ubiquitination are RNF8-dependent but distinct from the constitutive mono-ubiquitylation of H2AX ( Supplementary Figure 6D–E ).

A scenario is now emerging in which ubiquitination serves as a post-translational modifier in the DNA damage-dependent signaling cascade ( Huang and D’Andrea, 2006 ). Recent studies suggest a role of histone ubiquitination as a means to remodel the chromatin in order to facilitate the accumulation of DNA repair protein ( Kapetanaki et al., 2006 ; Wang et al., 2006 ). In addition, mono-ubiquitylation of a number of proteins has been demonstrated to be responsible for protein-protein interactions ( Garcia-Higuera et al., 2001 ; Matsushita et al., 2005 ; Pavri et al., 2006 ; Stelter and Ulrich, 2003 ; Taniguchi et al., 2002 ). Multiple ubiquitin moieties covalently attached via lysine 63 have also been reported to regulate and promote the accumulation of proteins involved in DNA repair ( Hoege et al., 2002 ; Hofmann and Pickart, 1999 ). More recently, the ubiquitin interacting motif (UIM)-containing protein Rap80 was discovered to play a role in the BRCA1-dependent DNA damage response, serving as an adaptor for BRCA1 accumulation at sites of DNA breaks ( Kim et al., 2007 ; Sobhian et al., 2007 ; Wang et al., 2007 ). Our observation that RNF8 mediates both the IRIF of conjugated ubiquitin and Rap80 at sites of DNA breaks implicates that Rap80 might associate with the damaged chromatin by tethering to certain FK2-reacting ubiquitylated protein(s). The fact that the IR-induced H2AX ubiquitylation is similarly compromised in RNF8-depleted cells not only implicates H2AX as a RNF8 substrate, but also suggests that ubiquitin chains on H2AX and other RNF8 substrates might serve as important docking sites during the transduction of the DNA damage signal.

While the ubiquitin-interacting domain (UIM)-containing protein RAP80 is required for BRCA1 localization, RAP80 is dispensable for 53BP1 localization. It would be interesting to test whether any additional ubiquitin-binding protein would serve to tether 53BP1 to DNA damage sites via damage-associated ubiquitin conjugates. Given the role of histone ubiquitylation in chromatin remodeling, it is also plausible that the RNF8-dependent ubiquitylation events at the vicinity of DNA breaks may enhance the accessibility of 53BP1 to modified histones ( Huyen et al., 2004 ; Sanders et al., 2004 ; Botuyan et al., 2006 ). In any case, based on the requirement of RNF8 RING domain, we propose that RNF8 facilitates the transduction of the initial phosphorylation-dependent DNA lesion signal by regulating H2AX ubiquitylation, and possibly other substrates, and thus control the localization of the Rap80-BRCA1 complex and other checkpoint proteins.

In summary, our study implicates a critical role of the E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF8 in supporting genome integrity by licensing the assembly of multiple checkpoint/DNA repair proteins at DNA lesions. The link between protein phosphorylation and ubiquitylation revealed in this study highlights the importance of post-translational modifiers as molecular switches that govern, amongst many cellular processes, the DNA damage response pathway in a stimulus-inducible manner. RNF8 is a key player involved in the cross-talk between different protein modifications, with its FHA domain required for its localization to DNA damage foci through a phosphorylation-dependent interaction, and its E3 ligase catalytic domain required for the further accumulation of Rap80, BRCA1 and 53BP1 ( Figure 7F ). The interplay between these two protein modification cascades may play an essential role in ensuring the proper execution of cellular response to DNA damage.
