---
pmid: '29214404'
title: The 19S proteasome regulates subtelomere silencing and facultative heterochromatin
  formation in fission yeast.
authors:
- Seo HD
- Kwon CS
- Lee D
journal: Curr Genet
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00294-017-0792-6
---

# The 19S proteasome regulates subtelomere silencing and facultative heterochromatin formation in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Seo HD, Kwon CS, Lee D
**Journal:** Curr Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00294-017-0792-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00294-017-0792-6)

## Abstract

1. Curr Genet. 2018 Jun;64(3):741-752. doi: 10.1007/s00294-017-0792-6. Epub 2017 
Dec 6.

The 19S proteasome regulates subtelomere silencing and facultative 
heterochromatin formation in fission yeast.

Seo HD(1), Kwon CS(2), Lee D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and 
Technology, Daejeon, 34141, South Korea.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biology, Korea Science Academy of KAIST, Busan, 
47162, South Korea.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and 
Technology, Daejeon, 34141, South Korea. daeyoup@kaist.ac.kr.

Accumulating evidence shows that non-proteolytic functions of the proteasome are 
as crucial as its well-known proteolytic function in regulating cellular 
activities. In our recent work, we showed that the 19S proteasome mediates the 
heterochromatin spreading of centromeric heterochromatin in non-proteolytic 
manner. However, the involvement of the proteasome in other heterochromatin 
regions remained largely unknown. In the present study, we investigated the 
non-proteolytic role of the 19S proteasome in subtelomere and facultative 
heterochromatin regions. Using the non-proteolytic mutant, rpt4-1, we show that 
the 19S proteasome is involved in regulating subtelomere silencing and 
facultative heterochromatin formation in fission yeast. In addition to this 
proteasome-related regulation, we also observed a distinct pathway that 
regulates subtelomere silencing and facultative heterochromatin formation 
through the Paf1 complex subunit, Leo1. Our comparison of the two pathways 
revealed a new group of heterochromatin domains that are regulated exclusively 
by the proteasome pathway. Taken together, our findings reveal that the 
proteasome is involved in the global regulation of facultative and constitutive 
heterochromatin.

DOI: 10.1007/s00294-017-0792-6
PMID: 29214404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
