---
pmid: '9041630'
title: Three-dimensional structures of three engineered cellulose-binding domains
  of cellobiohydrolase I from Trichoderma reesei.
authors:
- Mattinen ML
- Kontteli M
- Kerovuo J
- Linder M
- Annila A
- Lindeberg G
- Reinikainen T
- Drakenberg T
journal: Protein Sci
year: '1997'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC2143642
doi: 10.1002/pro.5560060204
---

# Three-dimensional structures of three engineered cellulose-binding domains of cellobiohydrolase I from Trichoderma reesei.
**Authors:** Mattinen ML, Kontteli M, Kerovuo J, Linder M, Annila A, Lindeberg G, Reinikainen T, Drakenberg T
**Journal:** Protein Sci (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pro.5560060204](https://doi.org/10.1002/pro.5560060204)
**PMC:** [PMC2143642](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2143642/)

## Abstract

1. Protein Sci. 1997 Feb;6(2):294-303. doi: 10.1002/pro.5560060204.

Three-dimensional structures of three engineered cellulose-binding domains of 
cellobiohydrolase I from Trichoderma reesei.

Mattinen ML(1), Kontteli M, Kerovuo J, Linder M, Annila A, Lindeberg G, 
Reinikainen T, Drakenberg T.

Author information:
(1)VTT, Chemical Technology, Finaland. maija.mattinen@vtt.fi

Three-dimensional solution structures for three engineered, synthetic CBDs (Y5A, 
Y31A, and Y32A) of cellobiohydrolase I (CBHI) from Trichoderma reesei were 
studied with nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and circular dichroism (CD) 
spectroscopy. According to CD measurements the antiparallel beta-sheet structure 
of the CBD fold was preserved in all engineered peptides. The three-dimensional 
NMR-based structures of Y31A and Y32A revealed only small local changes due to 
mutations in the flat face of CBD, which is expected to bind to crystalline 
cellulose. Therefore, the structural roles of Y31 and Y32 are minor, but their 
functional importance is obvious because these mutants do not bind strongly to 
cellulose. In the case of Y5A, the disruption of the structural framework at the 
N-terminus and the complete loss of binding affinity implies that Y5 has both 
structural and functional significance. The number of aromatic residues and 
their precise spatial arrangement in the flat face of the type I CBD fold 
appears to be critical for specific binding. A model for the CBD binding in 
which the three aligned aromatic rings stack onto every other glucose ring of 
the cellulose polymer is discussed.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.5560060204
PMCID: PMC2143642
PMID: 9041630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Three-dimensional solution structures for three engineered, synthetic CBDs (Y5A, Y31A, and Y32A) of cellobiohydrolase I (CBHI) from Trichoderma reesei were studied with nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy. According to CD measurements the antiparallel beta-sheet structure of the CBD fold was preserved in all engineered peptides. The three-dimensional NMR-based structures of Y31A and Y32A revealed only small local changes due to mutations in the flat face of CBD, which is expected to bind to crystalline cellulose. Therefore, the structural roles of Y31 and Y32 are minor, but their functional importance is obvious because these mutants do not bind strongly to cellulose. In the case of Y5A, the disruption of the structural framework at the N-terminus and the complete loss of binding affinity implies that Y5 has both structural and functional significance. The number of aromatic residues and their precise spatial arrangement in the flat face of the type I CBD fold appears to be critical for specific binding. A model for the CBD binding in which the three aligned aromatic rings stack onto every other glucose ring of the cellulose polymer is discussed.
