---
pmid: '16710296'
title: UBP43 is a novel regulator of interferon signaling independent of its ISG15
  isopeptidase activity.
authors:
- Malakhova OA
- Kim KI
- Luo JK
- Zou W
- Kumar KG
- Fuchs SY
- Shuai K
- Zhang DE
journal: EMBO J
year: '2006'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC1478183
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601149
---

# UBP43 is a novel regulator of interferon signaling independent of its ISG15 isopeptidase activity.
**Authors:** Malakhova OA, Kim KI, Luo JK, Zou W, Kumar KG, Fuchs SY, Shuai K, Zhang DE
**Journal:** EMBO J (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601149](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601149)
**PMC:** [PMC1478183](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1478183/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2006 Jun 7;25(11):2358-67. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601149. Epub 2006
May  18.

UBP43 is a novel regulator of interferon signaling independent of its ISG15 
isopeptidase activity.

Malakhova OA(1), Kim KI, Luo JK, Zou W, Kumar KG, Fuchs SY, Shuai K, Zhang DE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research 
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Interferons (IFNs) regulate diverse cellular functions through activation of the 
Janus kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT) 
pathway. Lack of Ubp43, an IFN-inducible ISG15 deconjugating enzyme, leads to 
IFN hypersensitivity in ubp43-/- mice, suggesting an important function of Ubp43 
in downregulation of IFN responses. Here, we show that Ubp43 negatively 
regulates IFN signaling independent of its isopeptidase activity towards ISG15. 
Ubp43 functions specifically for type I IFN signaling by downregulating the 
JAK-STAT pathway at the level of the IFN receptor. Using molecular, biochemical, 
and genetic approaches, we demonstrate that Ubp43 specifically binds to the 
IFNAR2 receptor subunit and inhibits the activity of receptor-associated JAK1 by 
blocking the interaction between JAK and the IFN receptor. These data implicate 
Ubp43 as a novel in vivo inhibitor of signal transduction pathways that are 
specifically triggered by type I IFN.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601149
PMCID: PMC1478183
PMID: 16710296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Interferons (IFNs) regulate diverse cellular functions through activation of the Janus kinase–signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK–STAT) pathway. Lack of Ubp43, an IFN-inducible ISG15 deconjugating enzyme, leads to IFN hypersensitivity in ubp43 −/− mice, suggesting an important function of Ubp43 in downregulation of IFN responses. Here, we show that Ubp43 negatively regulates IFN signaling independent of its isopeptidase activity towards ISG15. Ubp43 functions specifically for type I IFN signaling by downregulating the JAK–STAT pathway at the level of the IFN receptor. Using molecular, biochemical, and genetic approaches, we demonstrate that Ubp43 specifically binds to the IFNAR2 receptor subunit and inhibits the activity of receptor-associated JAK1 by blocking the interaction between JAK and the IFN receptor. These data implicate Ubp43 as a novel in vivo inhibitor of signal transduction pathways that are specifically triggered by type I IFN.

Introduction

Interferons (IFNs) are secreted pleiotropic cytokines that regulate diverse biological functions, including induction of the antiviral response, inhibition of cell proliferation, and immunomodulatory activities ( Platanias and Fish, 1999 ; Biron, 2001 ; Sen, 2001 ; Chawla-Sarkar et al , 2003 ; Pestka et al , 2004 ). Type I IFNs signal by binding to a cognate receptor at the cell surface followed by activation of the Janus kinase (JAK)–signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) pathway ( Darnell et al , 1994 ; Levy and Darnell, 2002 ; Shuai and Liu, 2003 ). JAK1 and TYK2, two members of the JAK family of nonreceptor tyrosine kinases, constitutively associate with the IFNAR2 and IFNAR1 subunits of the type I IFN receptor, respectively. Binding of IFN to the receptor triggers heterodimerization of the receptor chains, juxtaposing JAKs and initiating the phosphorylation cascade ( Aaronson and Horvath, 2002 ). Activated JAK1 phosphorylates TYK2 and they further phosphorylate the cytoplasmic tails of IFNAR proteins, creating a docking site for STAT1/STAT2 binding and their subsequent phosphorylation. Once phosphorylated, STAT1/2 heterodimers disengage from the receptor, form a complex with p48 (IRF9), translocate to the nucleus and induce gene expression through binding to the ìnterferon stimulated response element (ISRE) within the promoters of interferon stimulated genes (ISGs) ( Fu, 1995 ; Larner and Reich, 1996 ; Decker et al , 2002 ).

Stringent mechanisms of signal attenuation are essential for ensuring an appropriate and controlled cellular response. Several mechanisms of negative regulation have been implicated in the termination of IFN signaling ( Yamada et al , 2003 ), including IFN receptor ubiquitination by SCF β-TrCP/HOS E3 ubiquitin ligase and degradation by the lysosomal pathway, dephosphorylation of JAKs and the receptor by SHP-1 and SHP-2, dephosphorylation of STATs by TC45 and PTP1B, inhibition of STAT1 DNA binding by the family of PIAS proteins, and inhibition of JAK kinase activity and their subsequent degradation by SOCS proteins ( Greenhalgh and Hilton, 2000 ; Yasukawa et al , 2000 ; Kumar et al , 2003 ; Shuai and Liu, 2005 ).

Along with other ISGs, IFN-α/β stimulation leads to upregulation of ISG15, a ubiquitin-like protein (Ubl) that conjugates to a number of cellular substrates ( Narasimhan et al , 1995 , 1996 ; Ritchie and Zhang, 2004 ). The conjugation involves an enzymatic cascade that includes an E1 activating enzyme (Ube1L) ( Yuan and Krug, 2001 ), an E2 conjugating enzyme (Ubc8) ( Kim et al , 2004 ; Zhao et al , 2004 ), and most likely some E3 ligases ( Dao and Zhang, 2005 ; Zou and Zhang, 2006 ). The conjugation process is also reversible and controlled by an IFN-inducible cysteine protease of the ubiquitin-specific protease (USP) family of enzymes—Ubp43 (USP18) ( Malakhov et al , 2002 , 2003 ). Recently, we found that Ubp43 negatively regulates JAK–STAT signaling and may therefore represent a novel type of inhibitor in the IFN pathway ( Malakhov et al , 2002 , 2003 ). Ubp43 -deficient cells exhibit high levels of ISG15 modified proteins ( Ritchie et al , 2002 ). Furthermore, they are hypersensitive to type I IFN and undergo apoptosis upon IFN stimulation. Lack of Ubp43 results in enhanced and prolonged STAT1 phosphorylation, DNA binding, and increased induction of hundreds of ISGs as confirmed by gene expression microarray data ( Malakhova et al , 2003 ; data in preparation for publication). As the consequence, loss of Ubp43 in mice results in greater resistance to the cytopathic effects caused by a number of viruses including lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV), vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), and Sindbis virus (SNV) ( Ritchie et al , 2004 ). Although Ubp43 apparently inhibits JAK–STAT signaling, the molecular mechanisms of such inhibition are yet to be determined. As isopeptidase activity toward removal of ISG15 from its substrate is the only currently known function of Ubp43 ( Malakhov et al , 2002 ), it would be plausible that the negative regulation of IFN signaling by Ubp43 is mediated by de-conjugation of ISG15. However, ablation of ISG15 or Ube1L in mice does not reverse the phenotype of the Ubp43 knockout ( Knobeloch et al , 2005 ; Osiak et al , 2005 ; Kim et al , 2006 ).

In this report, we investigated the functional mechanism of Ubp43 action within the IFN signaling pathway and showed that Ubp43 negatively regulates JAK–STAT signaling independently of its isopeptidase activity. Ubp43 action is strictly specific to type I IFN responses and achieved through a direct interaction between Ubp43 and the IFNAR2 subunit of the receptor. Binding of exogenous and endogenous Ubp43 to IFNAR2 in vivo interferes with the JAK-receptor interaction and leads to inhibition of the downstream phosphorylation cascade and other signaling events. These data point to a mechanistically novel nonenzymatic function of Ubp43 as a specific in vivo inhibitor of cellular responses to type I IFN.

Discussion

IFNs regulate diverse cellular processes involved in cell growth, differentiation, and host defense by recruiting JAK kinases and STAT transcription factors to the specific receptors present at the cell surface ( Ivashkiv and Hu, 2004 ; Rawlings et al , 2004 ). In order to achieve an appropriate biological response to a diverse range of extracellular stimuli, cells acquired a sophisticated and strictly controlled network involving a great variety of proteins that negatively regulate cytokine signal transduction by various means ( Greenhalgh and Hilton, 2001 ; Yamada et al , 2003 ). Our previous studies demonstrated that ubp43- deficient cells are hypersensitive to type I IFN treatment, indicating that Ubp43 is a novel negative regulator of IFN signaling ( Malakhova et al , 2003 ). Furthermore, Ubp43 is a specific ISG15 protease that removes the ubiquitin-like modifier ISG15 from targeted proteins and therefore controls the level of ISG15 conjugated proteins in cells ( Malakhov et al , 2002 ). Indeed, ubp43 -deficient cells have higher basal and IFN induced levels of ISGylated proteins. Naturally, the level of protein ISG15 modification was thought to be linked to the hypersensitivity of these cells to IFN. However, one of the first questions raised was whether sustained ISG15 conjugation is the cause of IFN hypersensitivity or whether the negative regulation of JAK–STAT signaling by Ubp43 is mediated by an ISG15-independent mechanism. Analyses of stable ubp43 −/− MEF cell lines reconstituted with either ISG15 activating enzyme Ube1L siRNA or Ubp43 demonstrated that the inhibition of ISG15 conjugation by knocking down Ube1L in ubp43 −/− cells cannot reverse the IFN hypersensitive phenotype of ubp43- deficient cells. On the other hand, the reintroduction of wt or isopeptidase active site mutated Ubp43 protein into ubp43 −/− MEFs can effectively inhibit IFN sensitivity to a level comparable with wt cells. Such an observation is also confirmed in two different human cell lines used in this study. When either wt or the enzyme active site mutated Ubp43 is ectopically expressed in U3A or KT-1 cells, a specific inhibition of STAT1 phosphorylation and subsequent activation of ISGs in response to IFN is observed. These results clearly demonstrate that Ubp43 downregulates the cellular response to IFN independently of its enzymatic activity towards ISG15. These data were also confirmed in ubp43 −/− ube1L −/− double knockout mice, where MEF cells deficient for both Ubp43 and ISG15 conjugation retained the same level of IFN sensitivity as was observed in ubp43 -knockout cells ( Kim et al , 2006 ).

In recent years, several proteins within the JAK–STAT pathway were found to be targets for ISG15 modification, including JAKs and all STAT family members ( Malakhov et al , 2003 and our unpublished data), implying that modification of these proteins by ISG15 may influence their structure, function, and overall signaling in general. Our current data suggest that high accumulation of ISG15 conjugates in ubp43 -deficient cells is most likely a result but not a main cause of the IFN hypersensitivity observed in these cells.

Since the duration of IFN signaling is known to be controlled at multiple levels, including receptor proteolysis and activity of kinases and phosphatases, we further examined which particular step of the IFN signaling cascade involves Ubp43. We found that Ubp43 inhibits JAK–STAT signaling at the level of the IFN receptor, but is not involved in the control of receptor proteolysis or in sustaining the level of the IFN receptor at the cellular surface. Importantly, Ubp43 is capable of inhibiting the activation of the receptor-associated kinases—JAK1 and TYK2. While Ubp43 deficiency results in sustained phosphorylation of these JAKs in response to IFN, the forced expression of either wt or active site mutated Ubp43 reduces the phosphorylation level of these kinases and their downstream phosphorylation and transcriptional events as well as resistance to viral infection.

The ability of Ubp43 to attenuate the activity of JAKs suggests that it may associate with one or more components of the type I IFN-receptor complex and both JAKs and the receptor subunits represent potential targets for Ubp43 action. It is tempting to hypothesize that the direct binding of Ubp43 to JAKs may cause inhibition of its tyrosine kinase activity. However, further investigation did not support this theory since Ubp43 was not able to inhibit JAK1 or TYK2 activities that were auto-induced by constitutive overexpression of the respective kinases (data not shown). In addition, Ubp43 was found to act specifically for type I IFN signaling and did not inhibit the IFN-γ, IL-6, or IL-12 signaling pathways; even though all tested cytokines required JAK1 or TYK2 for signal transduction. These results suggested that inhibition of JAK phosphorylation by Ubp43 depended on the molecular specifics of type I IFN signaling and was likely to be achieved through an interaction between Ubp43 and type I IFN specific components of the IFN-receptor complex. Indeed, further investigation revealed that Ubp43 specifically interacted with the IFNAR2 chain of the type I IFN receptor, but not with IFNAR1 or IFNGR1. The physiologic effects of disrupting the Ubp43–IFNAR2 interaction were also investigated. The most important result of these studies is the identification of an Ubp43 mutant that cannot efficiently bind IFNAR2 and impair IFN-dependent induction of an ISRE-linked reporter gene. This result strongly suggests that the Ubp43–IFNAR2 interaction is critical for Ubp43-dependent inhibition of JAK–STAT signaling. Additional studies will be required to delineate the structure-function relationships of this interaction.

In order to determine the functional consequences of the Ubp43–IFNAR2 interaction, we identified the region of IFNAR2 required for Ubp43 binding. We found that the Ubp43 binding site is located in the membrane-proximal region of IFNAR2, covering the Box1–Box2 motifs of the receptor. The same domain of IFNAR2 is essential for the interaction with JAK1 ( Domanski et al , 1997 ; Usacheva et al , 2002 ), suggesting that Ubp43 could compete with JAK1 for receptor binding, consequently inhibiting its activation and the downstream intracellular signaling. Indeed, our experimental data from co-expression experiments demonstrate that Ubp43 inhibits the formation of the JAK1–IFNAR2 complex in a dose-dependent manner, suggesting that titration of JAKs away from the receptor may account for the observed inhibition of the downstream phosphorylation cascade and therefore represent the putative mode of Ubp43 action in the negative regulation of IFN signaling. This hypothesis has been corroborated by genetic evidence showing that knockdown of endogenous Ubp43 promotes the interaction between endogenous JAK1 and endogenous receptor subunit. It is also possible that, as in the case of SOCS proteins ( Greenhalgh and Hilton, 2000 ; Yasukawa et al , 2000 ; Kumar et al , 2003 ; Shuai and Liu, 2005 ), there are multiple roles for Ubp43 in regulating signal transduction, including its function in regulating protein ISGylation. Indeed, recent report clearly point to the role of ISG15 in the antiviral defense ( Lenschow et al , 2005 ). Further studies, such as knockin of the enzymatically inactive ubp43 into the ubp43 locus, will provide additional information about different aspects of Ubp43 in cellular innate immune responses.

The ability of Ubp43 to inhibit signal transduction and ultimately the biological response to IFN suggests that, like other known negative regulators of signal transduction, such as phosphatases (SHP-1, SHP-2, TC45, and PTP1B), SOCS and PIAS proteins, Ubp43 plays an important role in controlling the magnitude and/or duration of cellular responses to type I IFN. The evidence provided here, as well as our previous findings, suggests that Ubp43 acts in a classic negative feedback loop for IFN signal transduction. Like other genes such as SOCS, Ubp43 is induced by IFNs through the activation of the JAK–STAT pathway ( Li et al , 2000 ; Kang et al , 2001 ). Once induced and expressed, Ubp43 can directly bind to the IFN receptor and inhibit the receptor interaction with JAK, thereby reducing the phosphorylation of the receptor and STATs and suppressing signal transduction and downstream biological responses. Ubp43 deficient mice are highly resistant to viral/bacterial infection and cancer development in several experimental mouse models ( Ritchie et al , 2004 ; Kim et al , 2005 ;Yan and Zhang, data in preparation). It is of added importance that, unlike phosphatases, SOCS and PIAS that affect cellular responses to many cytokines, Ubp43-mediated inhibition is specific for the type I IFN signaling. Given that specificity and the fact that type I IFN are widely used as antiviral, anticancer, and immunomodulatory agents in therapy of chronic viral infections, malignancies, and relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis, Ubp43 appears to be a promising therapeutic target for improving the benefits of treatment.

Materials and methods

Details provided as Supplementary data .
