---
pmid: '9098922'
title: Valproic acid-induced changes in gene expression during neurulation in a mouse
  model.
authors:
- Wlodarczyk BC
- Craig JC
- Bennett GD
- Calvin JA
- Finnell RH
journal: Teratology
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1096-9926(199612)54:6<284::AID-TERA3>3.0.CO;2-Z
---

# Valproic acid-induced changes in gene expression during neurulation in a mouse model.
**Authors:** Wlodarczyk BC, Craig JC, Bennett GD, Calvin JA, Finnell RH
**Journal:** Teratology (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(SICI)1096-9926(199612)54:6<284::AID-TERA3>3.0.CO;2-Z](https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1096-9926(199612)54:6<284::AID-TERA3>3.0.CO;2-Z)

## Abstract

1. Teratology. 1996 Dec;54(6):284-97. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1096-9926(199612)54:6<284::AID-TERA3>3.0.CO;2-Z.

Valproic acid-induced changes in gene expression during neurulation in a mouse 
model.

Wlodarczyk BC(1), Craig JC, Bennett GD, Calvin JA, Finnell RH.

Author information:
(1)National Veterinary Research Institute, Department of Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, Pulawy, Poland.

The teratogenic potential of valproic acid has been well established both in 
experimental models and in human clinical studies. As with all human teratogens, 
there are genetically determined differences in individual susceptibility to the 
induction of congenital defects. Using a mouse model of valproate-induced neural 
tube defects, a study was undertaken to examine differential changes in gene 
expression for selected transcription factor (Pax-3, Emx-1, Emx-2, c-fos, c-jun, 
creb) and cell cycle checkpoint genes (bcl-2, p53, wee-1) during neural tube 
closure. In general, exposure to teratogenic concentrations of valproic acid 
elicited GD 9:12 control levels of transcription factor mRNA expression in GD 
9:0 embryos of both strains. This accelerated developmental profile is marked by 
significant elevation of Emx-1, Emx-2, c-fos, c-jun, and creb expression. There 
was also a significant over expression of the cell cycle genes p53 and bcl-2 in 
the LM/Bc embryos in response to the teratogenic insult. Examination of the 
ratio of expression of these genes clearly favored bcl-2, which supports the 
hypothesis that altered neuroepithelial cell proliferation rates, rather than 
increased apoptosis, is the underlying mechanism by which valproic acid alters 
normal neural tube morphogenesis. An investigation into interactive effects of 
these genes on the molecular profile of GD 9:0 embryos further validated this 
observation. That is, the overall proliferative state among the control embryos 
was prematurely modified into a more differentiated state following teratogenic 
insult. These results suggest that alterations in the expression of multiple 
genes are most likely responsible for valproic acid-induced neural tube defects.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1096-9926(199612)54:6<284::AID-TERA3>3.0.CO;2-Z
PMID: 9098922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
