---
pmid: '12239582'
title: 'Role of endogenous regucalcin in bone metabolism: bone loss is induced in
  regucalcin transgenic rats.'
authors:
- Yamaguchi M
- Misawa H
- Uchiyama S
- Morooka Y
- Tsurusaki Y
journal: Int J Mol Med
year: '2002'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC11113322
---

# Role of endogenous regucalcin in bone metabolism: bone loss is induced in regucalcin transgenic rats.
**Authors:** Yamaguchi M, Misawa H, Uchiyama S, Morooka Y, Tsurusaki Y
**Journal:** Int J Mol Med (2002)
**PMC:** [PMC11113322](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11113322/)

## Abstract

1. Int J Mol Med. 2002 Oct;10(4):377-83.

Role of endogenous regucalcin in bone metabolism: bone loss is induced in 
regucalcin transgenic rats.

Yamaguchi M(1), Misawa H, Uchiyama S, Morooka Y, Tsurusaki Y.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology and Molecular Metabolism, Graduate School of 
Nutritional Sciences, University of Shizuoka, Japan. 
yamaguch@u-shizuoka-ken.ac.jp

The role of endogenous regucalcin in the regulation of bone metabolism was 
investigated by using regucalcin transgenic (TG) rats. The expression of 
regucalcin mRNA in the femoral-diaphyseal and -metaphyseal tissues of normal 
(wild-type) rats was shown by using reverse transcription-polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR) with a specific primer of regucalcin cDNA. Regucalcin protein 
was detected in the femoral-diaphyseal and -metaphyseal tissues of normal 
(wild-type) rats using Western analysis. Regucalcin levels were significantly 
increased in the femoral-metaphyseal tissues of regucalcin TG male rats and in 
the diaphyseal and metaphyseal tissues of the TG female rats. The morphologic 
change in the femoral-diaphyseal and -metaphyseal tissues of regucalcin TG rats 
was demonstrated by using a peripheral quantitative computed tomography (pQCT); 
morphologic change was great in the femoral tissues of female rats as compared 
with that of male rats. Mineral content, mineral density and polar strength 
strain index in the femoral-diaphyseal and -metaphyseal tissues were markedly 
reduced in regucalcin TG female rats. A significant decrease in cortical 
thickness was seen in the femoral diaphysis of regucalcin TG female rats. 
Calcium content in the femoral-diaphyseal and -metaphyseal tissues was 
significantly decreased in regucalcin TG male and female rats; a remarkable 
decrease was seen in female rats. Femoral-metaphyseal alkaline phosphatase 
activity was significantly lowered in regucalcin TG female rats. The enzyme 
activity was not significantly changed in the femoral-diaphyseal tissues of the 
TG female rats. In the diaphyseal tissue of male rats, the enzyme activity was 
significantly decreased in the TG rats. A significant decrease in 
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) content was seen in the metaphyseal tissue of 
regucalcin TG male rats and in the diaphyseal and metaphyseal tissues of the TG 
female rats. This study demonstrates that bone loss is induced in the femoral 
tissue of regucalcin transgenic rats, and that a remarkable decrease in bone 
morphologic index and biochemical component was seen in the female rats. 
Regucalcin may be involved in the regulation of bone metabolism.

PMID: 12239582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Regucalcin (RGN) is a calcium (Ca 2+ )-binding protein widely expressed in vertebrate and invertebrate species, which is also known as senescence marker protein 30, due to its molecular weight (33 kDa) and a characteristically diminished expression with the aging process. RGN regulates intracellular Ca 2+ homeostasis and the activity of several proteins involved in intracellular signalling pathways, namely, kinases, phosphatases, phosphodiesterase, nitric oxide synthase and proteases, which highlights its importance in cell biology. In addition, RGN has cytoprotective effects reducing intracellular levels of oxidative stress, also playing a role in the control of cell survival and apoptosis. Multiple factors have been identified regulating the cell levels of RGN transcripts and protein, and an altered expression pattern of this interesting protein has been found in cases of reproductive disorders, neurodegenerative diseases and cancer. Moreover, RGN is a serum-secreted protein, and its levels have been correlated with the stage of disease, which strongly suggests the usefulness of this protein as a potential biomarker for monitoring disease onset and progression. The present review aims to discuss the available information concerning RGN expression and function in distinct cell types and tissues, integrating cellular and molecular mechanisms in the context of normal and pathological conditions. Insight into the cellular actions of RGN will be a key step towards deepening the knowledge of the biology of several human diseases.

Introduction

Regucalcin (RGN) was initially discovered in 1978 by Yamaguchi [ 1 ] and, although classified as a calcium (Ca 2+ )-binding protein, it does not contain the typical EF-hand Ca 2+ -binding motif [ 2 ]. The overall structure of RGN protein contains 24 β-strands forming 6 β-sheets able to bind diverse divalent cations (Ca 2+ , Mg 2+ , Mn 2+ and Zn 2+ ) [ 3 – 6 ]. The RGN ability to bind Ca 2+ was recently confirmed by X-ray diffraction studies which have allowed the resolving of the crystal structure of human RGN protein bound to Ca 2+ or Zn 2+ cations. Although Ca 2+ and Zn 2+ ions bind to the same amino acid residues forming a unique metal binding site in a nearly identical coordination, an very much higher level of dissociation constant is documented for Ca 2+ which could be relevant under non-physiological conditions, whereas elevated Ca 2+ levels can occur [ 4 ].

The RGN gene is localised in the p11.3-q11.2 and q11.1-12 segments of the human and rat X chromosome, respectively [ 7 , 8 ]. In both cases, the gene consists of seven exons [ 9 – 11 ] encoding a protein of 299 amino acid residues with an approximate molecular weight of 33 kDa [ 2 , 12 ]. For this reason, together with the diminished expression of RGN in tissues of aged animals, Fujita and co-authors [ 12 – 14 ] named it senescence marker protein 30 (SMP30).

RGN is highly expressed in the liver and kidney cortex [ 12 , 15 , 16 ], but it has been detected in several other tissues [ 16 , 17 ] in a broad range of vertebrate and invertebrate species [ 18 – 20 ]. The transcription of RGN gene is enhanced by several regulatory transcription factors upstream of the 5′ flaking region, namely the AP1, NF1-A1, RGPR-p117 and β-catenin [ 21 ]. Ca 2+ levels modulate RGN expression in a process involving, for example, calmodulin (CaM) or protein kinase C (PKC) [ 22 – 24 ]. Also, Ca 2+ -independent mechanisms [ 25 ], hormonal factors and others have been described as regulating the levels of RGN in cells [ 11 , 26 – 30 ]. Moreover, altered expression patterns of RGN have been associated with several disease conditions in both human and animal models [ 11 , 31 – 39 ], which highlights the importance of this protein in cell biology.

RGN has been localised to the cell nucleus and cytoplasm [ 26 , 40 , 41 ], as well as in the mitochondrial fraction [ 42 ], and multiple physiological functions have been assigned to this curious protein. Among them is the ability of RGN to influence Ca 2+ homeostasis through the regulation of Ca 2+ -pumping activity in the cell membrane, nucleus, microsomes, endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria of various cell types [ 43 ]. It has also been associated with intracellular signalling pathways, since it regulates several Ca 2+ -dependent enzymes such as protein kinases, tyrosine kinases, phosphatases, phosphodiesterase, nitric oxide synthase and proteases [ 43 – 48 ].

In addition, the antioxidant properties of RGN in reducing intracellular levels of oxidative stress have also been described. This effect is achieved through modulation of the activity of enzymes involved in generation of oxidative stress as well as in the antioxidant defence [ 49 – 52 ].

Several reports using gene-silencing and over-expression approaches have pointed out a role of RGN in regulating cell death and proliferation. Although the mechanisms implicated in this control are not completely understood, it has been demonstrated that RGN can regulate DNA synthesis and fragmentation [ 53 – 56 ], and modulate the expression of oncogenes, tumour suppressor genes and cell cycle regulators [ 53 , 54 , 57 ], influencing survival and apoptotic pathways [ 58 – 60 ].

This review discusses the current knowledge about the expression and function of RGN in several cell types and tissues, exploring concepts from the molecular biology point of view in signalling pathways and systems biology. The potential roles of RGN in pathological situations will also be discussed.
