---
pmid: '14744935'
title: Endoplasmic reticulum stress induces p53 cytoplasmic localization and prevents
  p53-dependent apoptosis by a pathway involving glycogen synthase kinase-3beta.
authors:
- Qu L
- Huang S
- Baltzis D
- Rivas-Estilla AM
- Pluquet O
- Hatzoglou M
- Koumenis C
- Taya Y
- Yoshimura A
- Koromilas AE
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC338280
doi: 10.1101/gad.1165804
---

# Endoplasmic reticulum stress induces p53 cytoplasmic localization and prevents p53-dependent apoptosis by a pathway involving glycogen synthase kinase-3beta.
**Authors:** Qu L, Huang S, Baltzis D, Rivas-Estilla AM, Pluquet O, Hatzoglou M, Koumenis C, Taya Y, Yoshimura A, Koromilas AE
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1165804](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1165804)
**PMC:** [PMC338280](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC338280/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2004 Feb 1;18(3):261-77. doi: 10.1101/gad.1165804. Epub 2004 Jan
26.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress induces p53 cytoplasmic localization and prevents 
p53-dependent apoptosis by a pathway involving glycogen synthase kinase-3beta.

Qu L(1), Huang S, Baltzis D, Rivas-Estilla AM, Pluquet O, Hatzoglou M, Koumenis 
C, Taya Y, Yoshimura A, Koromilas AE.

Author information:
(1)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, McGill University, Sir Mortimer B 
Davis-Jewish General Hospital, Montréal, Québec H3T 1E2, Canada.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2004 Feb 1;18(3):241-4. doi: 10.1101/gad.1181704.

The tumor suppressor p53, a sensor of multiple forms of cellular stress, is 
regulated by post-translational mechanisms to induce cell-cycle arrest, 
senescence, or apoptosis. We demonstrate that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress 
inhibits p53-mediated apoptosis. The mechanism of inhibition involves the 
increased cytoplasmic localization of p53 due to phosphorylation at serine 315 
and serine 376, which is mediated by glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta 
(GSK-3beta). ER stress induces GSK-3beta binding to p53 in the nucleus and 
enhances the cytoplasmic localization of the tumor suppressor. Inhibition of 
apoptosis caused by ER stress requires GSK-3beta and does not occur in cells 
expressing p53 with mutation(s) of serine 315 and/or serine 376 to alanine(s). 
As a result of the increased cytoplasmic localization, ER stress prevents p53 
stabilization and p53-mediated apoptosis upon DNA damage. It is concluded that 
inactivation of p53 is a protective mechanism utilized by cells to adapt to ER 
stress.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1165804
PMCID: PMC338280
PMID: 14744935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The tumor suppressor p53, a sensor of multiple forms of cellular stress, is regulated by post-translational mechanisms to induce cell-cycle arrest, senescence, or apoptosis. We demonstrate that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress inhibits p53-mediated apoptosis. The mechanism of inhibition involves the increased cytoplasmic localization of p53 due to phosphorylation at serine 315 and serine 376, which is mediated by glycogen synthase kinase-3 β (GSK-3β). ER stress induces GSK-3β binding to p53 in the nucleus and enhances the cytoplasmic localization of the tumor suppressor. Inhibition of apoptosis caused by ER stress requires GSK-3β and does not occur in cells expressing p53 with mutation(s) of serine 315 and/or serine 376 to alanine(s). As a result of the increased cytoplasmic localization, ER stress prevents p53 stabilization and p53-mediated apoptosis upon DNA damage. It is concluded that inactivation of p53 is a protective mechanism utilized by cells to adapt to ER stress.

Discussion

Herein, we show that pharmacological (i.e., TM, TG) or physiological inducers (i.e., glucose deprivation) of ER stress enhance p53 cytoplasmic localization, and prevent p53-mediated apoptosis (see model in Fig. 6E ). Regulation of p53 in ER-stressed cells is mediated, at least in part, by the site-specific phosphorylation at serines 315 and 376. Serine 315 lies within the bipartite NLS of p53 (residues 305-322), which was shown previously to be targeted by cdc2/cyclinB and cdk2/cyclinA ( Bischoff et al. 1990 ; Wang and Prives 1995 ). Serine 315 phosphorylation was reported previously to enhance p53 binding to DNA in vitro ( Bischoff et al. 1990 ; Wang and Prives 1995 ) and contribute to p53 transcriptional activation in response to DNA damage ( Blaydes et al. 2001 ). However, other studies suggested no role for serine 315 phosphorylation in regulation of p53 stability and activity in DNA-damaged cells ( Hengstermann et al. 1998 ; Ashcroft et al. 2000 ). Furthermore, p53 activation by phosphorylation at serine 315 is largely dependent on phosphorylation at other sites ( Appella and Anderson 2001 ). Contrary to genotoxic stress, our findings show that serine 315 phosphorylation is induced by ER stress and negatively regulates p53, indicating that various forms of stress utilize phosphorylation at serine 315 to differentially regulate p53. Serine 376 was initially characterized as a potential target of the CDK7-cycH-p36 complex of transcription factor IIH ( Lu et al. 1997 ). In unstressed cells, constitutive phosphorylation at serine 376 was suggested to contribute to p53 degradation ( Chernov et al. 2001 ), whereas in cells subjected to γ-irradiation, dephosphorylation of serine 376 facilitates p53 binding to sequence-specific DNA by recruiting 14-3-3 protein ( Waterman et al. 1998 ). Thus, it appears that serine 376 phosphorylation negatively regulates p53, consistent with our findings that phosphorylation at this site promotes p53 cytoplasmic localization and prevents p53-mediated apoptosis in ER-stressed cells.

We also show that phosphorylation at both serine 315 and 376 in ER-stressed cells is mediated by GSK-3β. GSK-3 is a multifunctional serine/threonine kinase initially described to play a key role in glycogen metabolism ( Cohen and Frame 2001 ; Doble and Woodgett 2003 ). The kinase is a key component of Wnt signaling, which controls the entire body pattern during embryonic development ( Cohen and Frame 2001 ; Doble and Woodgett 2003 ). It is well established that GSK-3 is involved in a wide range of cellular processes, including the phosphorylation of transcription and translation factors, regulation of cell cycle, and proliferation ( Cohen and Frame 2001 ; Doble and Woodgett 2003 ). Here, we show that ER stress induces GSK-3β activity and binding to p53 ( Fig. 4A,C ). Consistent with the biochemical data, confocal microscopy data indicated that ER stress induces the nuclear localization of GSK-3β and interaction with p53 ( Fig. 4B ). Interestingly, DNA damage induced by camptothecin was shown to promote a direct interaction between GSK-3β and p53 in the nucleus ( Watcharasit et al. 2002 ), indicating that the kinase is able to control p53 activity in various forms of stress. It is likely that p53 phosphorylation by GSK-3β occurs in the nucleus and facilitates the nucleocytoplasmic export and degradation of the tumor suppressor. Although GSK-3β mediates the phosphorylation of both serine 315 and serine 376 in vivo, serine 376 is the only one of the two sites that is directly phosphorylated in vitro. However, serine 376 may not be the only residue phosphorylated by GSK-3β, as mutation of serine 376 to alanine did not completely abolish the phosphorylation of the GST-p53 by the kinase in vitro ( Fig. 4E ). Therefore, phosphorylation of p53 by GSK-3β at various sites may also contribute to regulation of the tumor suppressor in ER-stressed cells. At a first glance, serine 376 phosphorylation by GSK-3β is an unusual finding, as efficient phosphorylation of many of GSK-3β substrates requires the presence of another phosphorylated residue optimally located four amino acids carboxy-terminal to the site of GSK-3β phosphorylation ( Cohen and Frame 2001 ). As such, serine 376 does not conform to the general rule of substrate specificity of this kinase. In analogy to p53, however, GSK-3β was shown previously to phosphorylate cyclin D 1 at threonine 286 and mediate the nuclear export and proteolysis of this cyclin ( Diehl et al. 1998 ; Alt et al. 2000 ). Interestingly, similar to serine 376 of p53, threonine 286 of cyclin D 1 does not meet the criteria of a bona fide substrate of the kinase ( Cohen and Frame 2001 ). Thus, both p53 and cyclin D 1 may be part of the general limitation in identifying the physiological substrates for GSK-3β ( Cohen and Frame 2001 ). Given that GSK-3β requires numerous levels of regulation to confer signal-dependent specificity ( Doble and Woodgett 2003 ), it is also likely that direct phosphorylation of p53 at serines 315 and 376 is mediated by downstream kinases, whose function is dependent on GSK-3β.

With regard to the biological significance of our findings, we demonstrate that ER stress impairs p53-dependent apoptosis. First, we demonstrated that ER stress prevents the stabilization of p53 in response to various forms of DNA damage and prevents p53-dependent cell death by 5-FU ( Fig. 2D,E ). These data are consistent with previous observations that TG treatment antagonizes drug-induced nuclear accumulation of p53 ( Kaneko and Tsukamoto 1995 ). Second, we showed that that GSK-3β plays an essential role in the inhibition of p53-mediated apoptosis (Figs. 5C and 6D ). Previous findings provided some evidence for a proapoptotic role of GSK-3β in pheochromocytoma (PC12) cells and Rat-1 fibroblasts through the inhibition of phosphatidyl-inositol-3 (PI-3) kinase pathway ( Bijur et al. 2000 ). In addition, overexpression of GSK-3β in neurons can increase apoptosis ( Hetman et al. 2000 ; Cross et al 2001 ). However, in contrast to these proapoptotic effects of the kinase, GSK-3β -/- mice die in utero due to apoptosis of hepatocytes between E13.5 and E14.5 ( Hoeflich et al. 2000 ). This is due to the inability to elicit an antiapoptotic response to tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), because GSK-3β -/- MEFs fail to activate NF-κB ( Hoeflich et al. 2000 ). Thus, GSK-3β appears to modulate apoptosis in a tissue- and stimuli-specific fashion ( Frame and Cohen 2001 ).

The physiological relevance of our findings may lie within the biology of ER and its sensitivity to alterations that disrupt its functions. Induction of UPR is a protective mechanism utilized by all cells to adapt to ER stress. At the molecular level, this response is presented by the induced synthesis of specific sets of ER resident proteins known as glucose-regulated proteins (Grps) or ER chaperones ( Lee 2001 ). In normal cells, induction of Grps is associated with tissue preservation or organ protection against ER stress ( Lee 2001 ). In neoplastic cells, however, the antiapoptotic function of Grps is implicated in immune resistance, cancer progression, and drug resistance ( Lee 2001 ). Therefore, inhibition of the apoptotic functions of p53 by ER stress represents an additional control mechanism used by cells to adapt to ER stress. If adaptation is not possible, then ER-stressed cells undergo apoptosis through the activation of evolutionary conserved pathways ( Ferri and Kroemer 2001 ; Kaufman et al. 2002 ), which proceed independently of p53.

ER stress has been linked to human diseases that are related to aberrant protein conformation including cystic fibrosis, Alzheimer's, and prion disease ( Aridor and Balch 1999 ). A recent study demonstrated that fibroblasts from Alzheimer's disease patients exhibit a defective p53-dependent gene transcription and are resistant to p53-mediated death upon DNA damage induced by oxidative injury ( Uberti et al. 2002 ). Furthermore, cytoplasmic retention of p53 is also a well-documented mechanism to inactivate p53 function in certain pathological conditions. For instance, constitutive cytoplasmic localization of wild-type p53 has been reported in solid tumors such as colorectal adenocarcinoma ( Sun et al. 1992 ; Bosari et al. 1994 ), neuroblastomas (Moll et al. 1995 , 1996 ), retinoblastoma ( Schlamp et al. 1997 ), hepatocellular carcinoma ( Ueda et al. 1995 ), and breast cancer ( Moll et al. 1992 ; Stenmark-Askmalm et al. 1994 ), and is associated with tumor metastasis and poor prognosis. Because ER stress can be induced by microenvironments of solid tumors ( Lee 2001 ), a state of chronic ER stress in these tumors might lead to the constitutive cytoplasmic localization of p53. Although it is not clear whether this phenotype is directly linked to malignancy, it suggests that defects in nuclear accumulation of p53 could contribute to tumor progression and unresponsiveness to anti-cancer therapies in patients. Thus, improved understanding of how exactly ER stress induces p53 cytoplasmic retention may facilitate the design of novel anti-cancer strategies that can reverse this process and render p53 functional once again by allowing it to accumulate in the nucleus.
