---
pmid: '12546818'
title: Axonal targeting of olfactory receptor neurons in Drosophila is controlled
  by Dscam.
authors:
- Hummel T
- Vasconcelos ML
- Clemens JC
- Fishilevich Y
- Vosshall LB
- Zipursky SL
journal: Neuron
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(02)01183-2
---

# Axonal targeting of olfactory receptor neurons in Drosophila is controlled by Dscam.
**Authors:** Hummel T, Vasconcelos ML, Clemens JC, Fishilevich Y, Vosshall LB, Zipursky SL
**Journal:** Neuron (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0896-6273(02)01183-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0896-6273(02)01183-2)

## Abstract

1. Neuron. 2003 Jan 23;37(2):221-31. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(02)01183-2.

Axonal targeting of olfactory receptor neurons in Drosophila is controlled by 
Dscam.

Hummel T(1), Vasconcelos ML, Clemens JC, Fishilevich Y, Vosshall LB, Zipursky 
SL.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biological Chemistry, The 
David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Different classes of olfactory receptor neurons (ORNs) in Drosophila innervate 
distinct targets, or glomeruli, in the antennal lobe of the brain. Here we 
demonstrate that specific ORN classes require the cell surface protein Dscam 
(Down Syndrome Cell Adhesion Molecule) to synapse in the correct glomeruli. 
Dscam mutant ORNs frequently terminated in ectopic sites both within and outside 
the antennal lobe. The morphology of Dscam mutant axon terminals in either 
ectopic or cognate targets was abnormal. Target specificity for other ORNs was 
not altered in Dscam mutants, suggesting that different ORNs use different 
strategies to regulate wiring. Multiple forms of Dscam RNA were detected in the 
developing antenna, and Dscam protein was localized to developing ORN axons. We 
propose a role for Dscam protein diversity in regulating ORN target specificity.

DOI: 10.1016/s0896-6273(02)01183-2
PMID: 12546818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
