---
pmid: '17515904'
title: Stabilization of RAD51 nucleoprotein filaments by the C-terminal region of
  BRCA2.
authors:
- Esashi F
- Galkin VE
- Yu X
- Egelman EH
- West SC
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nsmb1245
---

# Stabilization of RAD51 nucleoprotein filaments by the C-terminal region of BRCA2.
**Authors:** Esashi F, Galkin VE, Yu X, Egelman EH, West SC
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb1245](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb1245)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2007 Jun;14(6):468-74. doi: 10.1038/nsmb1245. Epub 2007
May  21.

Stabilization of RAD51 nucleoprotein filaments by the C-terminal region of 
BRCA2.

Esashi F(1), Galkin VE, Yu X, Egelman EH, West SC.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK, London Research Institute, Clare Hall Laboratories, South 
Mimms, Herts EN6 3LD, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2007 Jun;14(6):461-2. doi: 10.1038/nsmb0607-461.

The human breast cancer susceptibility gene BRCA2 is required for the regulation 
of RAD51-mediated homologous recombinational repair. BRCA2 interacts with RAD51 
monomers, as well as nucleoprotein filaments, primarily though the conserved BRC 
motifs. The unrelated C-terminal region of BRCA2 also interacts with RAD51. Here 
we show that the BRCA2 C terminus interacts directly with RAD51 filaments, but 
not monomers, by binding an interface created by two adjacent RAD51 protomers. 
These interactions stabilize filaments so that they cannot be dissociated by 
association with BRC repeats. Interaction of the BRCA2 C terminus with the RAD51 
filament causes a large movement of the flexible RAD51 N-terminal domain that is 
important in regulating filament dynamics. We suggest that interactions of the 
BRCA2 C-terminal region with RAD51 may facilitate efficient nucleation of RAD51 
multimers on DNA and thereby stimulate recombination-mediated repair.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb1245
PMID: 17515904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
