---
pmid: '20855529'
title: Cks1, Cdk1, and the 19S proteasome collaborate to regulate gene induction-dependent
  nucleosome eviction in yeast.
authors:
- Chaves S
- Baskerville C
- Yu V
- Reed SI
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC2976369
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00952-10
---

# Cks1, Cdk1, and the 19S proteasome collaborate to regulate gene induction-dependent nucleosome eviction in yeast.
**Authors:** Chaves S, Baskerville C, Yu V, Reed SI
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00952-10](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00952-10)
**PMC:** [PMC2976369](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2976369/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Nov;30(22):5284-94. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00952-10. Epub 2010
Sep  20.

Cks1, Cdk1, and the 19S proteasome collaborate to regulate gene 
induction-dependent nucleosome eviction in yeast.

Chaves S(1), Baskerville C, Yu V, Reed SI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North 
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Cks1, Cdk1 (Cdc28), and the proteasome are required for efficient 
transcriptional induction of GAL1 and other genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. 
We show here that one function of these proteins is to reduce nucleosome density 
on chromatin in a gene induction-specific manner. The transcriptional 
requirement for Cks1 can be bypassed if nucleosome density is reduced by an 
alternative pathway, indicating that this is the primary function of Cks1 in the 
context of gene induction. We further show that Cks1, Cdk1, and the 19S subunit 
of the proteasome are recruited to chromatin by binding directly to the histone 
H4 amino-terminal tail. However, this activity of the proteasome does not 
require the protease activity associated with the 20S subunit. These data 
suggest a model where binding of a complex consisting of Cks1, Cdk1, and the 19S 
proteasome to histone H4 leads to removal of nucleosomes via a nonproteolytic 
activity of the proteasome.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00952-10
PMCID: PMC2976369
PMID: 20855529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Preparing to download ... HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
