---
pmid: '12686401'
title: 'Inhibitory role of regucalcin in the regulation of nitric oxide synthase activity
  in rat brain cytosol: involvement of aging.'
authors:
- Tobisawa M
- Yamaguchi M
journal: J Neurol Sci
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0022-510x(02)00460-4
---

# Inhibitory role of regucalcin in the regulation of nitric oxide synthase activity in rat brain cytosol: involvement of aging.
**Authors:** Tobisawa M, Yamaguchi M
**Journal:** J Neurol Sci (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0022-510x(02)00460-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-510x(02)00460-4)

## Abstract

1. J Neurol Sci. 2003 May 15;209(1-2):47-54. doi: 10.1016/s0022-510x(02)00460-4.

Inhibitory role of regucalcin in the regulation of nitric oxide synthase 
activity in rat brain cytosol: involvement of aging.

Tobisawa M(1), Yamaguchi M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology and Molecular Metabolism, Graduate School of 
Nutritional Sciences, University of Shizuoka, 52-1 Yada, Shizuoka, 422-8526, 
Japan.

Regucalcin is shown to play a regulatory role in intracellular signaling system 
in many cells. The protein has been reported to be present in rat brain neurons. 
The role of regucalcin in the regulation of nitric oxide (NO) synthase activity 
in the brain cytosol of female young and aged rats was investigated. The 
presence of regucalcin (10(-9) and 10(-8) M) in the enzyme reaction mixture 
caused a significant decrease in NO synthase activity in the absence or presence 
of both calcium chloride (10 micro M) and calmodulin (2.5 micro g/ml). The 
effect of regucalcin (10(-8) M) in decreasing brain cytosolic NO synthase 
activity was not seen in the presence of Nw-nitro-L-argine methyl ester (NAME) 
(10(-4) M), trifluoperazine (20 micro M) or EGTA (1 mM). Regucalcin protein 
levels were significantly lowered in the brain cytosol of aged (50 weeks old) 
rats as compared with that of young (5 weeks old) rats. Brain cytosolic NO 
synthase activity was significantly reduced with increasing age. In aged rat 
brain cytosol, regucalcin caused a significant decrease in NO synthase activity. 
The presence of anti-regucalcin monoclonal antibody (10-50 ng/ml) caused a 
significant increase in NO synthase activity in the brain cytosol of young and 
aged rats. This elevation was completely blocked by the addition of regucalcin 
(10(-8) M). The present study demonstrates that endogenous regucalcin has an 
inhibitory effect on NO synthase activity in the brain cytosol of young and aged 
rats.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-510x(02)00460-4
PMID: 12686401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
