---
pmid: '15866165'
title: Canonical Wnt signaling in differentiated osteoblasts controls osteoclast differentiation.
authors:
- Glass DA 2nd
- Bialek P
- Ahn JD
- Starbuck M
- Patel MS
- Clevers H
- Taketo MM
- Long F
- McMahon AP
- Lang RA
- Karsenty G
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC12395929
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2005.02.017
---

# Canonical Wnt signaling in differentiated osteoblasts controls osteoclast differentiation.
**Authors:** Glass DA 2nd, Bialek P, Ahn JD, Starbuck M, Patel MS, Clevers H, Taketo MM, Long F, McMahon AP, Lang RA, Karsenty G
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2005.02.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2005.02.017)
**PMC:** [PMC12395929](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12395929/)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2005 May;8(5):751-64. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2005.02.017.

Canonical Wnt signaling in differentiated osteoblasts controls osteoclast 
differentiation.

Glass DA 2nd(1), Bialek P, Ahn JD, Starbuck M, Patel MS, Clevers H, Taketo MM, 
Long F, McMahon AP, Lang RA, Karsenty G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Bone Disease Program of Texas, 
Houston, 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2005 May;8(5):626-7. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2005.04.008.

Inactivation of beta-catenin in mesenchymal progenitors prevents osteoblast 
differentiation; inactivation of Lrp5, a gene encoding a likely Wnt coreceptor, 
results in low bone mass (osteopenia) by decreasing bone formation. These 
observations indicate that Wnt signaling controls osteoblast differentiation and 
suggest that it may regulate bone formation in differentiated osteoblasts. Here, 
we study later events and find that stabilization of beta-catenin in 
differentiated osteoblasts results in high bone mass, while its deletion from 
differentiated osteoblasts leads to osteopenia. Surprisingly, histological 
analysis showed that these mutations primarily affect bone resorption rather 
than bone formation. Cellular and molecular studies showed that beta-catenin 
together with TCF proteins regulates osteoblast expression of Osteoprotegerin, a 
major inhibitor of osteoclast differentiation. These findings demonstrate that 
beta-catenin, and presumably Wnt signaling, promote the ability of 
differentiated osteoblasts to inhibit osteoclast differentiation; thus, they 
broaden our knowledge of the functions Wnt proteins have at various stages of 
skeletogenesis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2005.02.017
PMID: 15866165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Background of studyMesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotent stem cells with the ability to differentiate into various types of cells, and this characteristic highlight the importance of MSCs for stem cell tissue engineering. Therefore, to integrate the underlying concepts of MSCs function in the studies, the key factor of their interaction with the extracellular matrix (ECM) should be observed. This interaction of cell-ECM is mediated by integrin, a transmembrane receptor that regulates cell adhesion, migration, and signaling, all of which are essential for tissue development and regeneration.Extensive research has investigated the roles of the integrin signaling pathway in MSCs, behavior, with particular focus on its relevance to tissue engineering and therapeutic applications. The findings highlighted the role of integrins in mechanotransduction and differentiation, adhesion complexes, and the activation of integrin pathways. Therefore, various complex interactions are involved in the pathways, with several kinases and molecules that influence the cellular responses. By understanding the interactions within the integrin signaling pathway, MSC applications can be better optimized for use in stem cell-based tissue engineering.This review provides a comprehensive overview of integrin signaling pathways in MSCs, summarizing key mechanisms and molecular interactions involved in these pathways. By synthesizing current knowledge, the paper aims to offer clear insights into the role of integrin signaling in regulating MSCs’ differentiation and its significance in stem cell-based tissue engineering.

Background of study

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotent stem cells with the ability to differentiate into various types of cells, and this characteristic highlight the importance of MSCs for stem cell tissue engineering. Therefore, to integrate the underlying concepts of MSCs function in the studies, the key factor of their interaction with the extracellular matrix (ECM) should be observed. This interaction of cell-ECM is mediated by integrin, a transmembrane receptor that regulates cell adhesion, migration, and signaling, all of which are essential for tissue development and regeneration.

Extensive research has investigated the roles of the integrin signaling pathway in MSCs, behavior, with particular focus on its relevance to tissue engineering and therapeutic applications. The findings highlighted the role of integrins in mechanotransduction and differentiation, adhesion complexes, and the activation of integrin pathways. Therefore, various complex interactions are involved in the pathways, with several kinases and molecules that influence the cellular responses. By understanding the interactions within the integrin signaling pathway, MSC applications can be better optimized for use in stem cell-based tissue engineering.

This review provides a comprehensive overview of integrin signaling pathways in MSCs, summarizing key mechanisms and molecular interactions involved in these pathways. By synthesizing current knowledge, the paper aims to offer clear insights into the role of integrin signaling in regulating MSCs’ differentiation and its significance in stem cell-based tissue engineering.

IntroductionCell surface receptors play a key role in the adhesion of cells to the extracellular matrix (ECM). Among them, integrins are important transmembrane receptors made up of two subunits: one α and one β glycoprotein. These αβ heterodimers are non-covalently linked and mediate both cell-to-cell and cell-to-matrix interactions [24]. Integrins form a dynamic connection between the intracellular cytoskeleton and the ECM, which helps regulate essential cellular processes such as growth, proliferation, and migration [48].Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are fibroblast-like, multipotent stem cells that can be isolated from tissues including bone marrow, adipose tissue, synovial membrane, dental pulp, and brain [17, 61]. The minimal criteria for identifying human MSCs include the expression of surface markers CD105, CD73, and CD90, along with the absence of hematopoietic markers such as CD34 and CD45 [56]. Additionally, MSCs must demonstrate the capacity to differentiate into at least three lineages including adipocytes, chondrocytes, and osteoblasts.The activation of downstream pathways by integrin in adipocytes, chondrocytes, and osteoblasts is very distinct, as shown in Fig. 1. In adipocytes, the interaction of ECM and integrin regulates adipogenesis by the activation of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway and inhibition of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) activity. These activations reduce the expression of adipogenic markers such as AP2, AdipoQ, and CEBPα. In chondrocytes, the integrin receives the signals from inflammation and produces the inflammatory mediators (IL-1β and TNF-α) and matrix-degrading enzymes (MMP-3 and MMP-13); while the activation of MAPK-ERK is driven by Src, leading to chondrogenesis. Lastly, in osteoblasts, the activation of integrin induces both Wnt/β-catenin and FAK/ERK pathways activation, which in turn promote mineralization and osteogenic differentiation, respectively.Fig. 1Integrin signaling in MSC-derived lineage differentiation. The activation of integrin regulates a distinct downstream signaling pathway and influences the activity of MSC-derived lineages. In adipocytes, the activation of integrin signaling suppresses FAK production and regulates the Wnt-/β-catenin pathway, and as a result, the adipogenic markers (AP2, AdipoQ, and CEBPα) are downregulated. In chondrocytes, the interaction of TGF-β1 and integrin leads to the activation of Src, and triggers the MAPK-ERK pathways. This activation promotes inflammatory responses, besides regulating cell proliferation and differentiation. In osteoblasts, integrin activation triggers both the Wnt-/β-catenin and FAK/ERK pathways, which subsequently promote bone mineralization and osteogenic differentiation, respectively. Created with BioRender.comIntegrin signaling pathway in MSC-differentiated adipocytesAdipocytes are one of the MSC-derived lineages, which can be differentiated from multipotential mesenchymal cells [8]. Adipogenesis of the stem cell into preadipocytes is due to the presence of key mediators, which are the members of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and Wnt families [10].ECM plays a very crucial role to remodel the fibroblast-like progenitor cells into matured adipocytes as adipogenesis is highly affected by the stiffness and flexibility of the matrix [45]. There are six stages during adipogenesis, which are mesenchymal precursors, committed preadipocytes, growth-arrested preadipocytes, followed by mitotic clonal expansion, terminal differentiation and last but not least, mature adipocytes [38]. At present, a study shows that the transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) superfamily is crucial for regulating adipocytes [41].In adipocytes, the integrin signaling pathway plays an important role, as regulation of adipocyte function and metabolism is directly related to the cell–matrix interactions, as shown in Fig. 1. This is due to the function of integrin as cell surface receptors, where the mechanical stimuli are received from the ECM. As the integrin lacks kinase activity, the absence of FAK leads to increased adipocytes apoptosis, which encourages insulin resistance and glucose intolerance [42]. One study shows that the downstream signaling of integrin is overlapping with insulin regulation, as the activation of integrin α5β1 increases the phosphorylation of the basal insulin receptor, together with insulin-stimulated insulin receptor substrate1 (IRS-1) [23].There are two types of adipose tissues in humans, which are white adipose tissue (WAT), which functions as energy storage, and brown adipose tissue (BAT) that is crucial in assisting heat generation via energy burning. Integrin subunit β1 plays an important role in WAT as it is a determinant for various types of adipocyte events; adipocyte differentiation, insulin signaling and lipid droplet storage [13]. In higher eukaryotes, WAT serves as the main energy storage, as the triacylglycerol is reserved when there is an abundance of energy. However, excessive amounts of WAT can lead to obesity. To understand the mechanisms involved within obesity and WAT, the mechanisms of adipocyte differentiation are carried on via preadipocyte culture systems [22]. Integrin α5β3 is one of the heterodimeric transmembrane receptors in 3T3-L1-differentiated adipocytes, and the results of a study by [12] shows that adipogenesis involved the regulation of integrin α5β3-mediated insulin growth factor 1 (IGF-1) signaling by Serine protease inhibitor A3C, Serpina3c.Remodeling of adipocytes is influenced by ECM remodeling that is regulated by matured adipocytes, as the complements of constructive and destructive enzymes are in equilibrium [46]. Therefore, in obesity and type 2 diabetes, the increase of ECM components such as collagen and the inflammation of adipocyte tissue is the main reason for the rise of abnormal adipocytes [57]. In another study, the integrin expression is directly related to adipocyte differentiation and also involved with insulin resistance of mouse 3T3-L1 differentiated adipocytes [44]. The study also found that in 3T3-L1 differentiated adipocytes, an increase of integrins and collagen enhanced the Extracellular-Related Kinase (ERK) pathway activation, which proves that the interactions between the integrins and ECM are important for gene expression regulation through the ERK signaling pathways.Integrin signaling pathway in MSC-differentiated chondrocytesAnother type of MSC-differentiated lineage is chondrocytes, the cells that are in charge of cartilage formation and maintenance, where the physical microenvironment of chondrocytes affects cartilage function and homeostasis significantly [21]. The cells are able to detect, interpret, and respond to the mechanical signals, and convert them into biochemical signals through a process called mechanotransduction. The mechanotransduction processes translate mechanical stimuli into mechanical signals via extracellular and pericellular sensors of cartilage pericellular matrix (PCM), inducing chondrogenesis during fetal development and encourage maturation of the cells in developmental stage [72]. One of the key extracellular sensors responsible for mechanotransduction during chondrogenesis is integrin, which functions as receptor for ECM within the cell membrane [28].MSCs can differentiate into chondrocytes with the induction of growth factors, such as TGF-β and BMPs. The chondrocytes are formed from a series of differentiation, where the bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs) differentiate into chondroprogenitor cells, which later develop to become chondrocytes [9]. The presence of TGF-β promotes cell proliferation and chondrogenic differentiation, and the BMPs trigger MSCs to differentiate into chondrocytes and also promoting secretion of chondrocyte-specific markers, for example, collagen type II and aggrecan [11].The integrins assist cell attachment by linking intracellular cytoskeleton with extracellular PCM and for the transduction of hypoosmotic stress during mechanotransduction, the presence of integrin α1β1 is very crucial [32]. One study shows that during the transduction process for cellular polarization regulation, integrin α5β1 responds to mechanical stimulation [69]. The main function of the β1 integrin family is for binding collagens and fibronectin of the PCM. Another study found that integrins responded to the inflammation in chondrocytes where the mechanical stress leads to activation of αVβ3 and αVβ5, thus inducing expression of IL-1β, TNF-α, MMP-3 and MMP-13, and therefore stimulating an inflammatory reaction as shown in Fig. 1 [28].Integrin signaling regulates several pathways involved in chondrogenesis, such as the Mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MAPK-ERK) pathway and transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) pathway. The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway is one of the signaling cascades that regulate cellular processes such as proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, and stress responses. Extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and p38 are two of the three major components of the MAPK pathway. The ERK pathway is activated by growth factors, hormones, and mitogens. This pathway promotes cell proliferation and regulates the G1/S phase transition of the cell. On the other hand, the p38 pathway is responsible for responding to stress signaling and also inflammation. MAPK-ERK pathway exhibits an interaction with integrins, where one study shows the connections between calcium-associated and integrin-associated Src kinases lead to activation of ERK-MAPK-p38 pathway upon receiving mechanical stimulation [54].On the contrary, the activation of the TGF-β1 signaling pathway is due to the mechanotransduction in chondrocytes, where the protein called TGF-β1 is secreted and then binds to cell surface receptors. This pathway helps with the regulation of cell proliferation, ECM synthesis, and tissue homeostasis, which is crucial for cartilage repair and pathology. The large family of growth factors known as TGF-β can regulate biological processes, cellular proliferation, and differentiation [55]. The general isoforms of TGF-β can be divided into three: TGF-β1, TGF-β2, and lastly, TGF-β3.Articular cartilage (AC) is mainly composed of chondrocytes that are surrounded by collagenous fibers, which help to produce extracellular matrix components like collagen and proteoglycans, required for the formation of strong and flexible cartilage (Nahian & Sapra, 2023). This is due to the ability of chondrocytes in homeostasis regulation between the AC joints, which act like a cushion, providing shock absorption for joint motions. Chondrocytes are the only cellular component of AC, and thus, have a crucial role in the maintenance of AC homeostasis. The chondrocytes regulate the stability of ECM synthesis and breakdown by responding to mechanical stress, low oxygen levels, and biochemical signals, so the AC stability can be preserved. Therefore, although chondrocytes help to provide a condition for smooth joint movement, excessive mechanical stress can promote inflammation, and at worst, can lead to osteoarthritis, which is a condition where degeneration of bone occurs [64]. Chondrocytes will be activated to respond to the mechanical stress and produce the inflammatory mediator, which increases the matrix degradation.Mechanical stress can induce ANGPTL2 (Angiopoietin-like protein 2) expression, which is known as the mediator of chronic inflammation. Angiopoietin-like protein (ANGPTL) family consists of 7 secreted glycoproteins, which have a similar structure to angiopoietin (ANGPT), but, unlike ANGPT, the ANGPTLs are not capable of binding to Tie1 and Tie2 receptor tyrosine kinases [34]. ANGPTLs are important in physiological processes, such as lipid metabolism, angiogenesis, and inflammation, and there are two ANGPTLs, ANGPTL2 and ANGPTL4, that are known to be involved with the integrin pathway. ANGPTL2 binds to integrin α5β1 on endothelial cells and binds integrin α4 and β2 to influence monocytes [63]. ANGPTL4, which induces the adhesion and migration of endothelial cells by binding to integrin αvβ3 [7].In chondrocytes, during both cells proliferation and resting, there is an expression of ANGPTL2, and therefore, in surrounding ECM, there is an accumulation of ANGPTL2 [65] The receptor of ANGPTL2 can bind with integrin α5β1 receptor in variety types of cells [33] In a study, mouse ATDC5 cells, which is a model for in vitro chondrogenic differentiation, is used to study relationship between integrin α5β1 and expression of ANGPTL2 in chondrocytes [64]. Throughout the differentiation stages of ATDC5 cells, the expression level of integrin α5 is stable, however, the expression of integrin β1 is decreased significantly. In addition, the study also shows that inflammation is promoted by ANGPTL2 in chondrocytes, as it has a significant role in the activation of inflammatory cytokines with the presence of integrin α5β1.In hyaline cartilage, an essential part of joints that help to provide frictionless articulation, and is important for joint homeostasis, chondrocytes can be found embedded into the ECM [15]. The chondrocytes later differentiate into chondroblasts, synthesizing the cartilage-specific ECM. The physiology of chondrocytes is influenced by ECM through mechanotransduction, as the mechanical stimulation can affect the cell functions through biophysical signals. In healthy adult cartilages, there are 7 integrins that can be found: integrin α1β1, α3β1, α5β1, α10β1, αvβ1, αvβ3 and αvβ5 [15].Excessive mechanical stimulation affects the chondrocytes, as the aggrecan expression is increased while the expression of metalloproteinase 3 (MMP-3), which was detected via integrin α5β1 [39] Therefore, the expression of certain integrins are very important to produce a healthy chondrocytes, for example, in chondrocytes with integrin β1 deficiency, the shape of the cells is abnormal and thus, unable to give a rise to columns in the growth plate in developing bones. This in turn can have an impact on the cell cycle, where cell proliferation is decreased since the deficiency of integrin β1 halts the role of integrin α5β1 as the receptor for fibronectin, hence directly impacting the mechanotransduction of chondrocytes [1].During the development of chondrocytes, integrin-β-like 1 (ITGBL1) has been expressed at certain stages, which can lead to inhibition of integrin signaling and also help to promote chondrogenesis [60]. The results from the study found that the expression of ITGBL 1 in chondrogenic human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hBMSCs) was observed using RT-PCR, where the gene Itgbl 1 is expressed gradually, and on day 12 of differentiation, the expression is at its highest. Nevertheless, in the chondrocytes of osteoarthritis, the gene Itgbl 1 expression decreased, suggesting there is a possibility of using ITGBL1 as an integrin inhibitor to overcome degenerative cartilage disorders.Integrin signaling in MSC-differentiated osteoblastsOsteoblasts are bone-forming cells derived from mesenchymal stem cells, responsible for synthesizing the bone matrix and coordinating skeletal mineralization. Along with the development and reparation of cells during the osteoblast differentiation, expression of specific genes can be detected to indicate the maturation of the cells in each stage of osteogenesis [59]. To become an osteoblast, MSCs differentiate upon induction by the master regulator of osteoblasts, runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) [35]. The RUNX2 initiates osteoblast development by activating the genes for bone formation, such as collagen type 1, osteopontin, and bone sialoprotein. However, while RUNX2 is essential to start osteogenesis, it is reduced later on as the high level of RUNX2 prevents the full maturation of cells and inhibits the proper bone mineralization. This is because bone is a dynamic tissue, and the ossification process involves the simultaneous involvement of osteoblasts in formation and osteoclasts in resorption [16].As a bone-specific MSCs, osteoblast is defined by three main functions, particularly by the role of osteoblasts in bone formation [29]. Osteoblast oversees the synthesis and secretion of some proteins in bone ECM, such as type I collagen and several growth factors, for example, BMPs and TGF-β. Also, osteoblast is involved in the mineralization of ECM, as it is coexpressed together with odontoblasts and cementoblasts in teeth. Other than that, osteoblast helps with pyrophosphate exportation, due to the production of the key ectoproteins, such as progressive ankylosis gene (ANK) and tissue nonspecific alkaline phosphate (TNAP) intracellularly.Big conductance calcium-activated potassium channels (BKs) have been involved for bone modelling study, and BKs also required for osteoblast function in vivo and in vitro [68]. There are four pore-forming α subunits within the BK channel and there also several regulatory β or γ subunits [36]. The expression of BK channels can be detected within the primary osteoblasts, osteoblast cell lines and also progenitors [40, 49, 50]. Therefore, the BK channels within the osteoblasts may be one of the mechanosensors that help to transduce the extracellular mechanical stimuli for cells.Numerous studies on bone formation and generation have focused on distinguishing osteoblasts from osteocytes during the process of osteogenesis. After human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) differentiate into osteoblasts, further osteogenesis is followed by the formation of osteocytes, which make up about 90–95% of bone cells [4]. In osteogenesis, the osteoblasts development is controlled by key regulators: TGF-β1, BMP-2, and RUNX2 [66, 67]. To investigate the surface markers of osteoblasts Lee et al. [37] used monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to analyze the expression profiles of hMSCs cultured with TGF-β1 and BMP-2 via flow cytometry. Four mAbs; MR14-E5, ER7-A7, ER7-A8, and MR1-B1, were generated, which specifically recognize integrins α2, α3 or αV expressed on bone-marrow derived hMSCs. The results of the study reported that the surface markers (CD73, CD90, CD146, and CD164) are higher in integrin αV-high hMSCs, showing that the αV induction can be used to indicate the early and late stages of osteoblasts.Differentiation of osteoblasts from pre-osteoblasts is induced by fibronectin 1 (FN-1), which also helps to promote mineralization in osteoblasts by utilizing the WNT/β-catenin pathway, as shown in Fig. 1. During the proliferation and differentiation of osteoblasts, FN-1 is produced, together with collagen type I. Thus, it is deduced that FN-1 is produced by osteoblasts in bone matrix formation [2]. Previously, a study in mouse genetics showed that the WNT/β-catenin pathway plays a crucial role in the regulation of the bone-remodeling process [19]. By using the pre-osteoblast cell line MC3T3-E1, the study found that FN-1 regulates the β-catenin signaling, and overexpression of FN-1 leads to the activation of the WNT/β-catenin signaling pathway [71]. Their results showed that the pre-osteoblasts proceeded to differentiate, along with the promotion of mineralization.Integrins are crucial for the regulation of osteoblasts, where the integrins are involved in migration, differentiation, proliferation, and bone formation, and these biological activities of the osteoblasts affect bone homeostasis [3]. In osteoblast differentiation, β1 and β3 integrins are involved in various cytokine regulation processes. BMP-2 dependent signaling is regulated by integrin β1 by controlling smad1/5 transcriptional activity in pre-osteogenesis [6]. The binding of β1 integrin protein with calcium-activated potassium channels helps with osteoblast differentiation and promotes bone formation [68]. The binding of α4β1 and β3 integrin to fibronectin also helps to stimulate osteoblast differentiation, together with mineralization [52].Collagen synthesis is a critical event during the differentiation of skeletal progenitors into osteoblasts, ensuring proper bone formation during osteoblast maturation [18]. Collagen, the most abundant ECM protein, can give structural support to the bone and teeth besides its function to carry the information from the environment of the ECM to the cells. There are four different integrin molecules responsible for the binding of collagen to the cells, each with a different pairing of the α and β1 subunits: α1β1, α2β1, α10β1, and last but not least, α11β1 [5, 43, 58, 70]. These integrins are important in binding with collagen to relay the information from the ECM microenvironment to the bone cells.One of the importance of osteoblasts is for the formation of the alveolar bone of teeth, and these osteoblasts come directly from the dental mesenchyme. Alveolar bone holds the teeth roots and is important for the absorption and distribution of occlusal forces that occur due to oral function [53]. The structure of alveolar bones is divided into two parts, which are cortical bone and trabecular bone [20]. In the alveolar bone, the osteoblasts are vital for bone mineralization and bone matrix production, and after doing their tasks, the osteoblasts may become inactive osteoblasts that line the bone, osteocytes, and undergo apoptosis [47].Due to mechanotransduction, the stiffness of the ECM influenced the hMSCs differentiation into osteoblasts, as there is an integrin interaction; for instance, the integrin α5β1 affects the osteogenic differentiation of hMSCs. Each of the subunits of the integrin has its functions, where α5 induces the expression of osteoblast markers [25] and β1 helps to respond to the mechanical stimulation for osteogenic differentiation [51]. Interactions between integrin α5 with signaling molecules, like FAK and extracellular-related kinase (ERK), are crucial for the cell–matrix relationship in inducing osteogenic differentiation. In a study to observe the relationship between matrix stiffness and osteogenic differentiation, hMSC cells cultured on ECM with the matrix stiffness of 62–68 kPa to induce the osteogenic differentiation depended on integrin α5, Akt, and GSK-3β [62].Migration of the cells is the most crucial step in osteogenesis, and the integrin signaling pathway plays an important role during cell migration, which is to detect the extracellular signaling molecules as the regulation of cell migration involving cell–matrix [30, 31]. Through cell migration, the MSC differentiation into osteoblasts is encouraged via the Wnt-β-catenin signaling pathway activation [26]. As the cell migration is modulated by cell surface receptors and mechanical signals from ECM, Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) peptide has been reported to be involved in regulating cell adhesion [14]. In another study, RGD-modified substrates were used to study the involvement of the Wnt-β-catenin signaling pathway in cell motility regulation [27]. The result shows that the inhibition of the Wnt signaling pathway prevents the osteoblastic differentiation of the MSCs with high motility, as the expression of integrin is induced directly by the Wnt signaling pathway.

Introduction

Cell surface receptors play a key role in the adhesion of cells to the extracellular matrix (ECM). Among them, integrins are important transmembrane receptors made up of two subunits: one α and one β glycoprotein. These αβ heterodimers are non-covalently linked and mediate both cell-to-cell and cell-to-matrix interactions [24]. Integrins form a dynamic connection between the intracellular cytoskeleton and the ECM, which helps regulate essential cellular processes such as growth, proliferation, and migration [48].

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are fibroblast-like, multipotent stem cells that can be isolated from tissues including bone marrow, adipose tissue, synovial membrane, dental pulp, and brain [17, 61]. The minimal criteria for identifying human MSCs include the expression of surface markers CD105, CD73, and CD90, along with the absence of hematopoietic markers such as CD34 and CD45 [56]. Additionally, MSCs must demonstrate the capacity to differentiate into at least three lineages including adipocytes, chondrocytes, and osteoblasts.

The activation of downstream pathways by integrin in adipocytes, chondrocytes, and osteoblasts is very distinct, as shown in Fig. 1. In adipocytes, the interaction of ECM and integrin regulates adipogenesis by the activation of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway and inhibition of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) activity. These activations reduce the expression of adipogenic markers such as AP2, AdipoQ, and CEBPα. In chondrocytes, the integrin receives the signals from inflammation and produces the inflammatory mediators (IL-1β and TNF-α) and matrix-degrading enzymes (MMP-3 and MMP-13); while the activation of MAPK-ERK is driven by Src, leading to chondrogenesis. Lastly, in osteoblasts, the activation of integrin induces both Wnt/β-catenin and FAK/ERK pathways activation, which in turn promote mineralization and osteogenic differentiation, respectively.Fig. 1Integrin signaling in MSC-derived lineage differentiation. The activation of integrin regulates a distinct downstream signaling pathway and influences the activity of MSC-derived lineages. In adipocytes, the activation of integrin signaling suppresses FAK production and regulates the Wnt-/β-catenin pathway, and as a result, the adipogenic markers (AP2, AdipoQ, and CEBPα) are downregulated. In chondrocytes, the interaction of TGF-β1 and integrin leads to the activation of Src, and triggers the MAPK-ERK pathways. This activation promotes inflammatory responses, besides regulating cell proliferation and differentiation. In osteoblasts, integrin activation triggers both the Wnt-/β-catenin and FAK/ERK pathways, which subsequently promote bone mineralization and osteogenic differentiation, respectively. Created with BioRender.com

Integrin signaling in MSC-derived lineage differentiation. The activation of integrin regulates a distinct downstream signaling pathway and influences the activity of MSC-derived lineages. In adipocytes, the activation of integrin signaling suppresses FAK production and regulates the Wnt-/β-catenin pathway, and as a result, the adipogenic markers (AP2, AdipoQ, and CEBPα) are downregulated. In chondrocytes, the interaction of TGF-β1 and integrin leads to the activation of Src, and triggers the MAPK-ERK pathways. This activation promotes inflammatory responses, besides regulating cell proliferation and differentiation. In osteoblasts, integrin activation triggers both the Wnt-/β-catenin and FAK/ERK pathways, which subsequently promote bone mineralization and osteogenic differentiation, respectively. Created with BioRender.com

Integrin signaling pathway in MSC-differentiated adipocytesAdipocytes are one of the MSC-derived lineages, which can be differentiated from multipotential mesenchymal cells [8]. Adipogenesis of the stem cell into preadipocytes is due to the presence of key mediators, which are the members of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and Wnt families [10].ECM plays a very crucial role to remodel the fibroblast-like progenitor cells into matured adipocytes as adipogenesis is highly affected by the stiffness and flexibility of the matrix [45]. There are six stages during adipogenesis, which are mesenchymal precursors, committed preadipocytes, growth-arrested preadipocytes, followed by mitotic clonal expansion, terminal differentiation and last but not least, mature adipocytes [38]. At present, a study shows that the transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) superfamily is crucial for regulating adipocytes [41].In adipocytes, the integrin signaling pathway plays an important role, as regulation of adipocyte function and metabolism is directly related to the cell–matrix interactions, as shown in Fig. 1. This is due to the function of integrin as cell surface receptors, where the mechanical stimuli are received from the ECM. As the integrin lacks kinase activity, the absence of FAK leads to increased adipocytes apoptosis, which encourages insulin resistance and glucose intolerance [42]. One study shows that the downstream signaling of integrin is overlapping with insulin regulation, as the activation of integrin α5β1 increases the phosphorylation of the basal insulin receptor, together with insulin-stimulated insulin receptor substrate1 (IRS-1) [23].There are two types of adipose tissues in humans, which are white adipose tissue (WAT), which functions as energy storage, and brown adipose tissue (BAT) that is crucial in assisting heat generation via energy burning. Integrin subunit β1 plays an important role in WAT as it is a determinant for various types of adipocyte events; adipocyte differentiation, insulin signaling and lipid droplet storage [13]. In higher eukaryotes, WAT serves as the main energy storage, as the triacylglycerol is reserved when there is an abundance of energy. However, excessive amounts of WAT can lead to obesity. To understand the mechanisms involved within obesity and WAT, the mechanisms of adipocyte differentiation are carried on via preadipocyte culture systems [22]. Integrin α5β3 is one of the heterodimeric transmembrane receptors in 3T3-L1-differentiated adipocytes, and the results of a study by [12] shows that adipogenesis involved the regulation of integrin α5β3-mediated insulin growth factor 1 (IGF-1) signaling by Serine protease inhibitor A3C, Serpina3c.Remodeling of adipocytes is influenced by ECM remodeling that is regulated by matured adipocytes, as the complements of constructive and destructive enzymes are in equilibrium [46]. Therefore, in obesity and type 2 diabetes, the increase of ECM components such as collagen and the inflammation of adipocyte tissue is the main reason for the rise of abnormal adipocytes [57]. In another study, the integrin expression is directly related to adipocyte differentiation and also involved with insulin resistance of mouse 3T3-L1 differentiated adipocytes [44]. The study also found that in 3T3-L1 differentiated adipocytes, an increase of integrins and collagen enhanced the Extracellular-Related Kinase (ERK) pathway activation, which proves that the interactions between the integrins and ECM are important for gene expression regulation through the ERK signaling pathways.

Integrin signaling pathway in MSC-differentiated adipocytes

Adipocytes are one of the MSC-derived lineages, which can be differentiated from multipotential mesenchymal cells [8]. Adipogenesis of the stem cell into preadipocytes is due to the presence of key mediators, which are the members of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and Wnt families [10].

ECM plays a very crucial role to remodel the fibroblast-like progenitor cells into matured adipocytes as adipogenesis is highly affected by the stiffness and flexibility of the matrix [45]. There are six stages during adipogenesis, which are mesenchymal precursors, committed preadipocytes, growth-arrested preadipocytes, followed by mitotic clonal expansion, terminal differentiation and last but not least, mature adipocytes [38]. At present, a study shows that the transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) superfamily is crucial for regulating adipocytes [41].

In adipocytes, the integrin signaling pathway plays an important role, as regulation of adipocyte function and metabolism is directly related to the cell–matrix interactions, as shown in Fig. 1. This is due to the function of integrin as cell surface receptors, where the mechanical stimuli are received from the ECM. As the integrin lacks kinase activity, the absence of FAK leads to increased adipocytes apoptosis, which encourages insulin resistance and glucose intolerance [42]. One study shows that the downstream signaling of integrin is overlapping with insulin regulation, as the activation of integrin α5β1 increases the phosphorylation of the basal insulin receptor, together with insulin-stimulated insulin receptor substrate1 (IRS-1) [23].

There are two types of adipose tissues in humans, which are white adipose tissue (WAT), which functions as energy storage, and brown adipose tissue (BAT) that is crucial in assisting heat generation via energy burning. Integrin subunit β1 plays an important role in WAT as it is a determinant for various types of adipocyte events; adipocyte differentiation, insulin signaling and lipid droplet storage [13]. In higher eukaryotes, WAT serves as the main energy storage, as the triacylglycerol is reserved when there is an abundance of energy. However, excessive amounts of WAT can lead to obesity. To understand the mechanisms involved within obesity and WAT, the mechanisms of adipocyte differentiation are carried on via preadipocyte culture systems [22]. Integrin α5β3 is one of the heterodimeric transmembrane receptors in 3T3-L1-differentiated adipocytes, and the results of a study by [12] shows that adipogenesis involved the regulation of integrin α5β3-mediated insulin growth factor 1 (IGF-1) signaling by Serine protease inhibitor A3C, Serpina3c.

Remodeling of adipocytes is influenced by ECM remodeling that is regulated by matured adipocytes, as the complements of constructive and destructive enzymes are in equilibrium [46]. Therefore, in obesity and type 2 diabetes, the increase of ECM components such as collagen and the inflammation of adipocyte tissue is the main reason for the rise of abnormal adipocytes [57]. In another study, the integrin expression is directly related to adipocyte differentiation and also involved with insulin resistance of mouse 3T3-L1 differentiated adipocytes [44]. The study also found that in 3T3-L1 differentiated adipocytes, an increase of integrins and collagen enhanced the Extracellular-Related Kinase (ERK) pathway activation, which proves that the interactions between the integrins and ECM are important for gene expression regulation through the ERK signaling pathways.

Integrin signaling pathway in MSC-differentiated chondrocytesAnother type of MSC-differentiated lineage is chondrocytes, the cells that are in charge of cartilage formation and maintenance, where the physical microenvironment of chondrocytes affects cartilage function and homeostasis significantly [21]. The cells are able to detect, interpret, and respond to the mechanical signals, and convert them into biochemical signals through a process called mechanotransduction. The mechanotransduction processes translate mechanical stimuli into mechanical signals via extracellular and pericellular sensors of cartilage pericellular matrix (PCM), inducing chondrogenesis during fetal development and encourage maturation of the cells in developmental stage [72]. One of the key extracellular sensors responsible for mechanotransduction during chondrogenesis is integrin, which functions as receptor for ECM within the cell membrane [28].MSCs can differentiate into chondrocytes with the induction of growth factors, such as TGF-β and BMPs. The chondrocytes are formed from a series of differentiation, where the bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs) differentiate into chondroprogenitor cells, which later develop to become chondrocytes [9]. The presence of TGF-β promotes cell proliferation and chondrogenic differentiation, and the BMPs trigger MSCs to differentiate into chondrocytes and also promoting secretion of chondrocyte-specific markers, for example, collagen type II and aggrecan [11].The integrins assist cell attachment by linking intracellular cytoskeleton with extracellular PCM and for the transduction of hypoosmotic stress during mechanotransduction, the presence of integrin α1β1 is very crucial [32]. One study shows that during the transduction process for cellular polarization regulation, integrin α5β1 responds to mechanical stimulation [69]. The main function of the β1 integrin family is for binding collagens and fibronectin of the PCM. Another study found that integrins responded to the inflammation in chondrocytes where the mechanical stress leads to activation of αVβ3 and αVβ5, thus inducing expression of IL-1β, TNF-α, MMP-3 and MMP-13, and therefore stimulating an inflammatory reaction as shown in Fig. 1 [28].Integrin signaling regulates several pathways involved in chondrogenesis, such as the Mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MAPK-ERK) pathway and transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) pathway. The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway is one of the signaling cascades that regulate cellular processes such as proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, and stress responses. Extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and p38 are two of the three major components of the MAPK pathway. The ERK pathway is activated by growth factors, hormones, and mitogens. This pathway promotes cell proliferation and regulates the G1/S phase transition of the cell. On the other hand, the p38 pathway is responsible for responding to stress signaling and also inflammation. MAPK-ERK pathway exhibits an interaction with integrins, where one study shows the connections between calcium-associated and integrin-associated Src kinases lead to activation of ERK-MAPK-p38 pathway upon receiving mechanical stimulation [54].On the contrary, the activation of the TGF-β1 signaling pathway is due to the mechanotransduction in chondrocytes, where the protein called TGF-β1 is secreted and then binds to cell surface receptors. This pathway helps with the regulation of cell proliferation, ECM synthesis, and tissue homeostasis, which is crucial for cartilage repair and pathology. The large family of growth factors known as TGF-β can regulate biological processes, cellular proliferation, and differentiation [55]. The general isoforms of TGF-β can be divided into three: TGF-β1, TGF-β2, and lastly, TGF-β3.Articular cartilage (AC) is mainly composed of chondrocytes that are surrounded by collagenous fibers, which help to produce extracellular matrix components like collagen and proteoglycans, required for the formation of strong and flexible cartilage (Nahian & Sapra, 2023). This is due to the ability of chondrocytes in homeostasis regulation between the AC joints, which act like a cushion, providing shock absorption for joint motions. Chondrocytes are the only cellular component of AC, and thus, have a crucial role in the maintenance of AC homeostasis. The chondrocytes regulate the stability of ECM synthesis and breakdown by responding to mechanical stress, low oxygen levels, and biochemical signals, so the AC stability can be preserved. Therefore, although chondrocytes help to provide a condition for smooth joint movement, excessive mechanical stress can promote inflammation, and at worst, can lead to osteoarthritis, which is a condition where degeneration of bone occurs [64]. Chondrocytes will be activated to respond to the mechanical stress and produce the inflammatory mediator, which increases the matrix degradation.Mechanical stress can induce ANGPTL2 (Angiopoietin-like protein 2) expression, which is known as the mediator of chronic inflammation. Angiopoietin-like protein (ANGPTL) family consists of 7 secreted glycoproteins, which have a similar structure to angiopoietin (ANGPT), but, unlike ANGPT, the ANGPTLs are not capable of binding to Tie1 and Tie2 receptor tyrosine kinases [34]. ANGPTLs are important in physiological processes, such as lipid metabolism, angiogenesis, and inflammation, and there are two ANGPTLs, ANGPTL2 and ANGPTL4, that are known to be involved with the integrin pathway. ANGPTL2 binds to integrin α5β1 on endothelial cells and binds integrin α4 and β2 to influence monocytes [63]. ANGPTL4, which induces the adhesion and migration of endothelial cells by binding to integrin αvβ3 [7].In chondrocytes, during both cells proliferation and resting, there is an expression of ANGPTL2, and therefore, in surrounding ECM, there is an accumulation of ANGPTL2 [65] The receptor of ANGPTL2 can bind with integrin α5β1 receptor in variety types of cells [33] In a study, mouse ATDC5 cells, which is a model for in vitro chondrogenic differentiation, is used to study relationship between integrin α5β1 and expression of ANGPTL2 in chondrocytes [64]. Throughout the differentiation stages of ATDC5 cells, the expression level of integrin α5 is stable, however, the expression of integrin β1 is decreased significantly. In addition, the study also shows that inflammation is promoted by ANGPTL2 in chondrocytes, as it has a significant role in the activation of inflammatory cytokines with the presence of integrin α5β1.In hyaline cartilage, an essential part of joints that help to provide frictionless articulation, and is important for joint homeostasis, chondrocytes can be found embedded into the ECM [15]. The chondrocytes later differentiate into chondroblasts, synthesizing the cartilage-specific ECM. The physiology of chondrocytes is influenced by ECM through mechanotransduction, as the mechanical stimulation can affect the cell functions through biophysical signals. In healthy adult cartilages, there are 7 integrins that can be found: integrin α1β1, α3β1, α5β1, α10β1, αvβ1, αvβ3 and αvβ5 [15].Excessive mechanical stimulation affects the chondrocytes, as the aggrecan expression is increased while the expression of metalloproteinase 3 (MMP-3), which was detected via integrin α5β1 [39] Therefore, the expression of certain integrins are very important to produce a healthy chondrocytes, for example, in chondrocytes with integrin β1 deficiency, the shape of the cells is abnormal and thus, unable to give a rise to columns in the growth plate in developing bones. This in turn can have an impact on the cell cycle, where cell proliferation is decreased since the deficiency of integrin β1 halts the role of integrin α5β1 as the receptor for fibronectin, hence directly impacting the mechanotransduction of chondrocytes [1].During the development of chondrocytes, integrin-β-like 1 (ITGBL1) has been expressed at certain stages, which can lead to inhibition of integrin signaling and also help to promote chondrogenesis [60]. The results from the study found that the expression of ITGBL 1 in chondrogenic human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hBMSCs) was observed using RT-PCR, where the gene Itgbl 1 is expressed gradually, and on day 12 of differentiation, the expression is at its highest. Nevertheless, in the chondrocytes of osteoarthritis, the gene Itgbl 1 expression decreased, suggesting there is a possibility of using ITGBL1 as an integrin inhibitor to overcome degenerative cartilage disorders.

Integrin signaling pathway in MSC-differentiated chondrocytes

Another type of MSC-differentiated lineage is chondrocytes, the cells that are in charge of cartilage formation and maintenance, where the physical microenvironment of chondrocytes affects cartilage function and homeostasis significantly [21]. The cells are able to detect, interpret, and respond to the mechanical signals, and convert them into biochemical signals through a process called mechanotransduction. The mechanotransduction processes translate mechanical stimuli into mechanical signals via extracellular and pericellular sensors of cartilage pericellular matrix (PCM), inducing chondrogenesis during fetal development and encourage maturation of the cells in developmental stage [72]. One of the key extracellular sensors responsible for mechanotransduction during chondrogenesis is integrin, which functions as receptor for ECM within the cell membrane [28].

MSCs can differentiate into chondrocytes with the induction of growth factors, such as TGF-β and BMPs. The chondrocytes are formed from a series of differentiation, where the bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs) differentiate into chondroprogenitor cells, which later develop to become chondrocytes [9]. The presence of TGF-β promotes cell proliferation and chondrogenic differentiation, and the BMPs trigger MSCs to differentiate into chondrocytes and also promoting secretion of chondrocyte-specific markers, for example, collagen type II and aggrecan [11].

The integrins assist cell attachment by linking intracellular cytoskeleton with extracellular PCM and for the transduction of hypoosmotic stress during mechanotransduction, the presence of integrin α1β1 is very crucial [32]. One study shows that during the transduction process for cellular polarization regulation, integrin α5β1 responds to mechanical stimulation [69]. The main function of the β1 integrin family is for binding collagens and fibronectin of the PCM. Another study found that integrins responded to the inflammation in chondrocytes where the mechanical stress leads to activation of αVβ3 and αVβ5, thus inducing expression of IL-1β, TNF-α, MMP-3 and MMP-13, and therefore stimulating an inflammatory reaction as shown in Fig. 1 [28].

Integrin signaling regulates several pathways involved in chondrogenesis, such as the Mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MAPK-ERK) pathway and transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) pathway. The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway is one of the signaling cascades that regulate cellular processes such as proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, and stress responses. Extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and p38 are two of the three major components of the MAPK pathway. The ERK pathway is activated by growth factors, hormones, and mitogens. This pathway promotes cell proliferation and regulates the G1/S phase transition of the cell. On the other hand, the p38 pathway is responsible for responding to stress signaling and also inflammation. MAPK-ERK pathway exhibits an interaction with integrins, where one study shows the connections between calcium-associated and integrin-associated Src kinases lead to activation of ERK-MAPK-p38 pathway upon receiving mechanical stimulation [54].

On the contrary, the activation of the TGF-β1 signaling pathway is due to the mechanotransduction in chondrocytes, where the protein called TGF-β1 is secreted and then binds to cell surface receptors. This pathway helps with the regulation of cell proliferation, ECM synthesis, and tissue homeostasis, which is crucial for cartilage repair and pathology. The large family of growth factors known as TGF-β can regulate biological processes, cellular proliferation, and differentiation [55]. The general isoforms of TGF-β can be divided into three: TGF-β1, TGF-β2, and lastly, TGF-β3.

Articular cartilage (AC) is mainly composed of chondrocytes that are surrounded by collagenous fibers, which help to produce extracellular matrix components like collagen and proteoglycans, required for the formation of strong and flexible cartilage (Nahian & Sapra, 2023). This is due to the ability of chondrocytes in homeostasis regulation between the AC joints, which act like a cushion, providing shock absorption for joint motions. Chondrocytes are the only cellular component of AC, and thus, have a crucial role in the maintenance of AC homeostasis. The chondrocytes regulate the stability of ECM synthesis and breakdown by responding to mechanical stress, low oxygen levels, and biochemical signals, so the AC stability can be preserved. Therefore, although chondrocytes help to provide a condition for smooth joint movement, excessive mechanical stress can promote inflammation, and at worst, can lead to osteoarthritis, which is a condition where degeneration of bone occurs [64]. Chondrocytes will be activated to respond to the mechanical stress and produce the inflammatory mediator, which increases the matrix degradation.

Mechanical stress can induce ANGPTL2 (Angiopoietin-like protein 2) expression, which is known as the mediator of chronic inflammation. Angiopoietin-like protein (ANGPTL) family consists of 7 secreted glycoproteins, which have a similar structure to angiopoietin (ANGPT), but, unlike ANGPT, the ANGPTLs are not capable of binding to Tie1 and Tie2 receptor tyrosine kinases [34]. ANGPTLs are important in physiological processes, such as lipid metabolism, angiogenesis, and inflammation, and there are two ANGPTLs, ANGPTL2 and ANGPTL4, that are known to be involved with the integrin pathway. ANGPTL2 binds to integrin α5β1 on endothelial cells and binds integrin α4 and β2 to influence monocytes [63]. ANGPTL4, which induces the adhesion and migration of endothelial cells by binding to integrin αvβ3 [7].

In chondrocytes, during both cells proliferation and resting, there is an expression of ANGPTL2, and therefore, in surrounding ECM, there is an accumulation of ANGPTL2 [65] The receptor of ANGPTL2 can bind with integrin α5β1 receptor in variety types of cells [33] In a study, mouse ATDC5 cells, which is a model for in vitro chondrogenic differentiation, is used to study relationship between integrin α5β1 and expression of ANGPTL2 in chondrocytes [64]. Throughout the differentiation stages of ATDC5 cells, the expression level of integrin α5 is stable, however, the expression of integrin β1 is decreased significantly. In addition, the study also shows that inflammation is promoted by ANGPTL2 in chondrocytes, as it has a significant role in the activation of inflammatory cytokines with the presence of integrin α5β1.

In hyaline cartilage, an essential part of joints that help to provide frictionless articulation, and is important for joint homeostasis, chondrocytes can be found embedded into the ECM [15]. The chondrocytes later differentiate into chondroblasts, synthesizing the cartilage-specific ECM. The physiology of chondrocytes is influenced by ECM through mechanotransduction, as the mechanical stimulation can affect the cell functions through biophysical signals. In healthy adult cartilages, there are 7 integrins that can be found: integrin α1β1, α3β1, α5β1, α10β1, αvβ1, αvβ3 and αvβ5 [15].

Excessive mechanical stimulation affects the chondrocytes, as the aggrecan expression is increased while the expression of metalloproteinase 3 (MMP-3), which was detected via integrin α5β1 [39] Therefore, the expression of certain integrins are very important to produce a healthy chondrocytes, for example, in chondrocytes with integrin β1 deficiency, the shape of the cells is abnormal and thus, unable to give a rise to columns in the growth plate in developing bones. This in turn can have an impact on the cell cycle, where cell proliferation is decreased since the deficiency of integrin β1 halts the role of integrin α5β1 as the receptor for fibronectin, hence directly impacting the mechanotransduction of chondrocytes [1].

During the development of chondrocytes, integrin-β-like 1 (ITGBL1) has been expressed at certain stages, which can lead to inhibition of integrin signaling and also help to promote chondrogenesis [60]. The results from the study found that the expression of ITGBL 1 in chondrogenic human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hBMSCs) was observed using RT-PCR, where the gene Itgbl 1 is expressed gradually, and on day 12 of differentiation, the expression is at its highest. Nevertheless, in the chondrocytes of osteoarthritis, the gene Itgbl 1 expression decreased, suggesting there is a possibility of using ITGBL1 as an integrin inhibitor to overcome degenerative cartilage disorders.

Integrin signaling in MSC-differentiated osteoblastsOsteoblasts are bone-forming cells derived from mesenchymal stem cells, responsible for synthesizing the bone matrix and coordinating skeletal mineralization. Along with the development and reparation of cells during the osteoblast differentiation, expression of specific genes can be detected to indicate the maturation of the cells in each stage of osteogenesis [59]. To become an osteoblast, MSCs differentiate upon induction by the master regulator of osteoblasts, runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) [35]. The RUNX2 initiates osteoblast development by activating the genes for bone formation, such as collagen type 1, osteopontin, and bone sialoprotein. However, while RUNX2 is essential to start osteogenesis, it is reduced later on as the high level of RUNX2 prevents the full maturation of cells and inhibits the proper bone mineralization. This is because bone is a dynamic tissue, and the ossification process involves the simultaneous involvement of osteoblasts in formation and osteoclasts in resorption [16].As a bone-specific MSCs, osteoblast is defined by three main functions, particularly by the role of osteoblasts in bone formation [29]. Osteoblast oversees the synthesis and secretion of some proteins in bone ECM, such as type I collagen and several growth factors, for example, BMPs and TGF-β. Also, osteoblast is involved in the mineralization of ECM, as it is coexpressed together with odontoblasts and cementoblasts in teeth. Other than that, osteoblast helps with pyrophosphate exportation, due to the production of the key ectoproteins, such as progressive ankylosis gene (ANK) and tissue nonspecific alkaline phosphate (TNAP) intracellularly.Big conductance calcium-activated potassium channels (BKs) have been involved for bone modelling study, and BKs also required for osteoblast function in vivo and in vitro [68]. There are four pore-forming α subunits within the BK channel and there also several regulatory β or γ subunits [36]. The expression of BK channels can be detected within the primary osteoblasts, osteoblast cell lines and also progenitors [40, 49, 50]. Therefore, the BK channels within the osteoblasts may be one of the mechanosensors that help to transduce the extracellular mechanical stimuli for cells.Numerous studies on bone formation and generation have focused on distinguishing osteoblasts from osteocytes during the process of osteogenesis. After human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) differentiate into osteoblasts, further osteogenesis is followed by the formation of osteocytes, which make up about 90–95% of bone cells [4]. In osteogenesis, the osteoblasts development is controlled by key regulators: TGF-β1, BMP-2, and RUNX2 [66, 67]. To investigate the surface markers of osteoblasts Lee et al. [37] used monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to analyze the expression profiles of hMSCs cultured with TGF-β1 and BMP-2 via flow cytometry. Four mAbs; MR14-E5, ER7-A7, ER7-A8, and MR1-B1, were generated, which specifically recognize integrins α2, α3 or αV expressed on bone-marrow derived hMSCs. The results of the study reported that the surface markers (CD73, CD90, CD146, and CD164) are higher in integrin αV-high hMSCs, showing that the αV induction can be used to indicate the early and late stages of osteoblasts.Differentiation of osteoblasts from pre-osteoblasts is induced by fibronectin 1 (FN-1), which also helps to promote mineralization in osteoblasts by utilizing the WNT/β-catenin pathway, as shown in Fig. 1. During the proliferation and differentiation of osteoblasts, FN-1 is produced, together with collagen type I. Thus, it is deduced that FN-1 is produced by osteoblasts in bone matrix formation [2]. Previously, a study in mouse genetics showed that the WNT/β-catenin pathway plays a crucial role in the regulation of the bone-remodeling process [19]. By using the pre-osteoblast cell line MC3T3-E1, the study found that FN-1 regulates the β-catenin signaling, and overexpression of FN-1 leads to the activation of the WNT/β-catenin signaling pathway [71]. Their results showed that the pre-osteoblasts proceeded to differentiate, along with the promotion of mineralization.Integrins are crucial for the regulation of osteoblasts, where the integrins are involved in migration, differentiation, proliferation, and bone formation, and these biological activities of the osteoblasts affect bone homeostasis [3]. In osteoblast differentiation, β1 and β3 integrins are involved in various cytokine regulation processes. BMP-2 dependent signaling is regulated by integrin β1 by controlling smad1/5 transcriptional activity in pre-osteogenesis [6]. The binding of β1 integrin protein with calcium-activated potassium channels helps with osteoblast differentiation and promotes bone formation [68]. The binding of α4β1 and β3 integrin to fibronectin also helps to stimulate osteoblast differentiation, together with mineralization [52].Collagen synthesis is a critical event during the differentiation of skeletal progenitors into osteoblasts, ensuring proper bone formation during osteoblast maturation [18]. Collagen, the most abundant ECM protein, can give structural support to the bone and teeth besides its function to carry the information from the environment of the ECM to the cells. There are four different integrin molecules responsible for the binding of collagen to the cells, each with a different pairing of the α and β1 subunits: α1β1, α2β1, α10β1, and last but not least, α11β1 [5, 43, 58, 70]. These integrins are important in binding with collagen to relay the information from the ECM microenvironment to the bone cells.One of the importance of osteoblasts is for the formation of the alveolar bone of teeth, and these osteoblasts come directly from the dental mesenchyme. Alveolar bone holds the teeth roots and is important for the absorption and distribution of occlusal forces that occur due to oral function [53]. The structure of alveolar bones is divided into two parts, which are cortical bone and trabecular bone [20]. In the alveolar bone, the osteoblasts are vital for bone mineralization and bone matrix production, and after doing their tasks, the osteoblasts may become inactive osteoblasts that line the bone, osteocytes, and undergo apoptosis [47].Due to mechanotransduction, the stiffness of the ECM influenced the hMSCs differentiation into osteoblasts, as there is an integrin interaction; for instance, the integrin α5β1 affects the osteogenic differentiation of hMSCs. Each of the subunits of the integrin has its functions, where α5 induces the expression of osteoblast markers [25] and β1 helps to respond to the mechanical stimulation for osteogenic differentiation [51]. Interactions between integrin α5 with signaling molecules, like FAK and extracellular-related kinase (ERK), are crucial for the cell–matrix relationship in inducing osteogenic differentiation. In a study to observe the relationship between matrix stiffness and osteogenic differentiation, hMSC cells cultured on ECM with the matrix stiffness of 62–68 kPa to induce the osteogenic differentiation depended on integrin α5, Akt, and GSK-3β [62].Migration of the cells is the most crucial step in osteogenesis, and the integrin signaling pathway plays an important role during cell migration, which is to detect the extracellular signaling molecules as the regulation of cell migration involving cell–matrix [30, 31]. Through cell migration, the MSC differentiation into osteoblasts is encouraged via the Wnt-β-catenin signaling pathway activation [26]. As the cell migration is modulated by cell surface receptors and mechanical signals from ECM, Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) peptide has been reported to be involved in regulating cell adhesion [14]. In another study, RGD-modified substrates were used to study the involvement of the Wnt-β-catenin signaling pathway in cell motility regulation [27]. The result shows that the inhibition of the Wnt signaling pathway prevents the osteoblastic differentiation of the MSCs with high motility, as the expression of integrin is induced directly by the Wnt signaling pathway.

Integrin signaling in MSC-differentiated osteoblasts

Osteoblasts are bone-forming cells derived from mesenchymal stem cells, responsible for synthesizing the bone matrix and coordinating skeletal mineralization. Along with the development and reparation of cells during the osteoblast differentiation, expression of specific genes can be detected to indicate the maturation of the cells in each stage of osteogenesis [59]. To become an osteoblast, MSCs differentiate upon induction by the master regulator of osteoblasts, runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) [35]. The RUNX2 initiates osteoblast development by activating the genes for bone formation, such as collagen type 1, osteopontin, and bone sialoprotein. However, while RUNX2 is essential to start osteogenesis, it is reduced later on as the high level of RUNX2 prevents the full maturation of cells and inhibits the proper bone mineralization. This is because bone is a dynamic tissue, and the ossification process involves the simultaneous involvement of osteoblasts in formation and osteoclasts in resorption [16].

As a bone-specific MSCs, osteoblast is defined by three main functions, particularly by the role of osteoblasts in bone formation [29]. Osteoblast oversees the synthesis and secretion of some proteins in bone ECM, such as type I collagen and several growth factors, for example, BMPs and TGF-β. Also, osteoblast is involved in the mineralization of ECM, as it is coexpressed together with odontoblasts and cementoblasts in teeth. Other than that, osteoblast helps with pyrophosphate exportation, due to the production of the key ectoproteins, such as progressive ankylosis gene (ANK) and tissue nonspecific alkaline phosphate (TNAP) intracellularly.

Big conductance calcium-activated potassium channels (BKs) have been involved for bone modelling study, and BKs also required for osteoblast function in vivo and in vitro [68]. There are four pore-forming α subunits within the BK channel and there also several regulatory β or γ subunits [36]. The expression of BK channels can be detected within the primary osteoblasts, osteoblast cell lines and also progenitors [40, 49, 50]. Therefore, the BK channels within the osteoblasts may be one of the mechanosensors that help to transduce the extracellular mechanical stimuli for cells.

Numerous studies on bone formation and generation have focused on distinguishing osteoblasts from osteocytes during the process of osteogenesis. After human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) differentiate into osteoblasts, further osteogenesis is followed by the formation of osteocytes, which make up about 90–95% of bone cells [4]. In osteogenesis, the osteoblasts development is controlled by key regulators: TGF-β1, BMP-2, and RUNX2 [66, 67]. To investigate the surface markers of osteoblasts Lee et al. [37] used monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to analyze the expression profiles of hMSCs cultured with TGF-β1 and BMP-2 via flow cytometry. Four mAbs; MR14-E5, ER7-A7, ER7-A8, and MR1-B1, were generated, which specifically recognize integrins α2, α3 or αV expressed on bone-marrow derived hMSCs. The results of the study reported that the surface markers (CD73, CD90, CD146, and CD164) are higher in integrin αV-high hMSCs, showing that the αV induction can be used to indicate the early and late stages of osteoblasts.

Differentiation of osteoblasts from pre-osteoblasts is induced by fibronectin 1 (FN-1), which also helps to promote mineralization in osteoblasts by utilizing the WNT/β-catenin pathway, as shown in Fig. 1. During the proliferation and differentiation of osteoblasts, FN-1 is produced, together with collagen type I. Thus, it is deduced that FN-1 is produced by osteoblasts in bone matrix formation [2]. Previously, a study in mouse genetics showed that the WNT/β-catenin pathway plays a crucial role in the regulation of the bone-remodeling process [19]. By using the pre-osteoblast cell line MC3T3-E1, the study found that FN-1 regulates the β-catenin signaling, and overexpression of FN-1 leads to the activation of the WNT/β-catenin signaling pathway [71]. Their results showed that the pre-osteoblasts proceeded to differentiate, along with the promotion of mineralization.

Integrins are crucial for the regulation of osteoblasts, where the integrins are involved in migration, differentiation, proliferation, and bone formation, and these biological activities of the osteoblasts affect bone homeostasis [3]. In osteoblast differentiation, β1 and β3 integrins are involved in various cytokine regulation processes. BMP-2 dependent signaling is regulated by integrin β1 by controlling smad1/5 transcriptional activity in pre-osteogenesis [6]. The binding of β1 integrin protein with calcium-activated potassium channels helps with osteoblast differentiation and promotes bone formation [68]. The binding of α4β1 and β3 integrin to fibronectin also helps to stimulate osteoblast differentiation, together with mineralization [52].

Collagen synthesis is a critical event during the differentiation of skeletal progenitors into osteoblasts, ensuring proper bone formation during osteoblast maturation [18]. Collagen, the most abundant ECM protein, can give structural support to the bone and teeth besides its function to carry the information from the environment of the ECM to the cells. There are four different integrin molecules responsible for the binding of collagen to the cells, each with a different pairing of the α and β1 subunits: α1β1, α2β1, α10β1, and last but not least, α11β1 [5, 43, 58, 70]. These integrins are important in binding with collagen to relay the information from the ECM microenvironment to the bone cells.

One of the importance of osteoblasts is for the formation of the alveolar bone of teeth, and these osteoblasts come directly from the dental mesenchyme. Alveolar bone holds the teeth roots and is important for the absorption and distribution of occlusal forces that occur due to oral function [53]. The structure of alveolar bones is divided into two parts, which are cortical bone and trabecular bone [20]. In the alveolar bone, the osteoblasts are vital for bone mineralization and bone matrix production, and after doing their tasks, the osteoblasts may become inactive osteoblasts that line the bone, osteocytes, and undergo apoptosis [47].

Due to mechanotransduction, the stiffness of the ECM influenced the hMSCs differentiation into osteoblasts, as there is an integrin interaction; for instance, the integrin α5β1 affects the osteogenic differentiation of hMSCs. Each of the subunits of the integrin has its functions, where α5 induces the expression of osteoblast markers [25] and β1 helps to respond to the mechanical stimulation for osteogenic differentiation [51]. Interactions between integrin α5 with signaling molecules, like FAK and extracellular-related kinase (ERK), are crucial for the cell–matrix relationship in inducing osteogenic differentiation. In a study to observe the relationship between matrix stiffness and osteogenic differentiation, hMSC cells cultured on ECM with the matrix stiffness of 62–68 kPa to induce the osteogenic differentiation depended on integrin α5, Akt, and GSK-3β [62].

Migration of the cells is the most crucial step in osteogenesis, and the integrin signaling pathway plays an important role during cell migration, which is to detect the extracellular signaling molecules as the regulation of cell migration involving cell–matrix [30, 31]. Through cell migration, the MSC differentiation into osteoblasts is encouraged via the Wnt-β-catenin signaling pathway activation [26]. As the cell migration is modulated by cell surface receptors and mechanical signals from ECM, Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) peptide has been reported to be involved in regulating cell adhesion [14]. In another study, RGD-modified substrates were used to study the involvement of the Wnt-β-catenin signaling pathway in cell motility regulation [27]. The result shows that the inhibition of the Wnt signaling pathway prevents the osteoblastic differentiation of the MSCs with high motility, as the expression of integrin is induced directly by the Wnt signaling pathway.

ConclusionThe integrin signaling pathway is a key for the regulation of mesenchymal stem cell differentiation into adipocytes, chondrocytes, and osteoblasts. This is mainly due to the interaction between integrins and the ECM, which is crucial to the cellular processes during mesenchymal stem cell differentiation, with the help of growth factors and other molecular cues. While numerous studies have elucidated integrin signaling pathways in MSC-derived lineages, several inconsistencies have yet to be clarified. For example, the role of integrin β1 in adipogenesis varies depending on the cell type and the target species. Discrepancies have been observed in the findings from primary adipocyte cultures and 3T3-L1 cell lines, which show that the study model selection influences the outcomes. Similarly, the ATDC5 cells, the cell line used widely in chondrogenic differentiation, may not accurately reflect the complex ECM of articular cartilage in vivo. Nevertheless, through the integrin signaling pathways, the importance of integrins to maintain tissue function is highlighted, therefore unfolds the opportunities for stem cell-based engineering.

The integrin signaling pathway is a key for the regulation of mesenchymal stem cell differentiation into adipocytes, chondrocytes, and osteoblasts. This is mainly due to the interaction between integrins and the ECM, which is crucial to the cellular processes during mesenchymal stem cell differentiation, with the help of growth factors and other molecular cues. While numerous studies have elucidated integrin signaling pathways in MSC-derived lineages, several inconsistencies have yet to be clarified. For example, the role of integrin β1 in adipogenesis varies depending on the cell type and the target species. Discrepancies have been observed in the findings from primary adipocyte cultures and 3T3-L1 cell lines, which show that the study model selection influences the outcomes. Similarly, the ATDC5 cells, the cell line used widely in chondrogenic differentiation, may not accurately reflect the complex ECM of articular cartilage in vivo. Nevertheless, through the integrin signaling pathways, the importance of integrins to maintain tissue function is highlighted, therefore unfolds the opportunities for stem cell-based engineering.
