---
pmid: '16474389'
title: Dendritic patterning by Dscam and synaptic partner matching in the Drosophila
  antennal lobe.
authors:
- Zhu H
- Hummel T
- Clemens JC
- Berdnik D
- Zipursky SL
- Luo L
journal: Nat Neurosci
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nn1652
---

# Dendritic patterning by Dscam and synaptic partner matching in the Drosophila antennal lobe.
**Authors:** Zhu H, Hummel T, Clemens JC, Berdnik D, Zipursky SL, Luo L
**Journal:** Nat Neurosci (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nn1652](https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1652)

## Abstract

1. Nat Neurosci. 2006 Mar;9(3):349-55. doi: 10.1038/nn1652. Epub 2006 Feb 12.

Dendritic patterning by Dscam and synaptic partner matching in the Drosophila 
antennal lobe.

Zhu H(1), Hummel T, Clemens JC, Berdnik D, Zipursky SL, Luo L.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biological Sciences, 
Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

In the olfactory system of Drosophila melanogaster, axons of olfactory receptor 
neurons (ORNs) and dendrites of second-order projection neurons typically target 
1 of approximately 50 glomeruli. Dscam, an immunoglobulin superfamily protein, 
acts in ORNs to regulate axon targeting. Here we show that Dscam acts in 
projection neurons and local interneurons to control the elaboration of 
dendritic fields. The removal of Dscam selectively from projection neurons or 
local interneurons led to clumped dendrites and marked reduction in their 
dendritic field size. Overexpression of Dscam in projection neurons caused 
dendrites to be more diffuse during development and shifted their relative 
position in adulthood. Notably, the positional shift of projection neuron 
dendrites caused a corresponding shift of its partner ORN axons, thus 
maintaining the connection specificity. This observation provides evidence for a 
pre- and postsynaptic matching mechanism independent of precise glomerular 
positioning.

DOI: 10.1038/nn1652
PMID: 16474389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
