---
pmid: '8910473'
title: ATPase activity of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator.
authors:
- Li C
- Ramjeesingh M
- Wang W
- Garami E
- Hewryk M
- Lee D
- Rommens JM
- Galley K
- Bear CE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.45.28463
---

# ATPase activity of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator.
**Authors:** Li C, Ramjeesingh M, Wang W, Garami E, Hewryk M, Lee D, Rommens JM, Galley K, Bear CE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.45.28463](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.45.28463)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Nov 8;271(45):28463-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.45.28463.

ATPase activity of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator.

Li C(1), Ramjeesingh M, Wang W, Garami E, Hewryk M, Lee D, Rommens JM, Galley K, 
Bear CE.

Author information:
(1)Divisions of Cell Biology, Research Institute, Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, Canada M5G 1X8. bear@sickkids.on.ca

The gene mutated in cystic fibrosis codes for the cystic fibrosis transmembrane 
conductance regulator (CFTR), a cyclic AMP-activated chloride channel thought to 
be critical for salt and water transport by epithelial cells. Plausible models 
exist to describe a role for ATP hydrolysis in CFTR channel activity; however, 
biochemical evidence that CFTR possesses intrinsic ATPase activity is lacking. 
In this study, we report the first measurements of the rate of ATP hydrolysis by 
purified, reconstituted CFTR. The mutation CFTRG551D resides within a motif 
conserved in many nucleotidases and is known to cause severe human disease. 
Following reconstitution the mutant protein exhibited both defective ATP 
hydrolysis and channel gating, providing direct evidence that CFTR utilizes ATP 
to gate its channel activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.45.28463
PMID: 8910473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
