---
pmid: '12813049'
title: Characterization of FGFRL1, a novel fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor
  preferentially expressed in skeletal tissues.
authors:
- Trueb B
- Zhuang L
- Taeschler S
- Wiedemann M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M300281200
---

# Characterization of FGFRL1, a novel fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor preferentially expressed in skeletal tissues.
**Authors:** Trueb B, Zhuang L, Taeschler S, Wiedemann M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M300281200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M300281200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 5;278(36):33857-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M300281200. Epub
2003  Jun 17.

Characterization of FGFRL1, a novel fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor 
preferentially expressed in skeletal tissues.

Trueb B(1), Zhuang L, Taeschler S, Wiedemann M.

Author information:
(1)ITI Research Institute, University of Bern, P. O. Box 54, CH-3010 Bern, 
Switzerland. beat.trueb@iti.unibe.ch

Clones for a novel transmembrane receptor termed FGFRL1 were isolated from a 
subtracted, cartilage-specific cDNA library prepared from chicken sterna. 
Homologous sequences were identified in other vertebrates, including man, mouse, 
rat and fish, but not in invertebrates such as Caenorhabditis elegans and 
Drosophila. FGFRL1 was expressed preferentially in skeletal tissues as 
demonstrated by Northern blotting and in situ hybridization. Small amounts of 
the FGFRL1 mRNA were also detected in other tissues such as skeletal muscle and 
heart. The novel protein contained three extracellular Ig-like domains that were 
related to the members of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor family. 
However, it lacked the intracellular protein tyrosine kinase domain required for 
signal transduction by transphosphorylation. When expressed in cultured cells as 
a fusion protein with green fluorescent protein, FGFRL1 was specifically 
localized to the plasma membrane where it might interact with FGF ligands. 
Recombinant FGFRL1 protein was produced in a baculovirus system with intact 
disulfide bonds. Similar to FGF receptors, the expressed protein interacted 
specifically with heparin and with FGF2. When overexpressed in MG-63 
osteosarcoma cells, the novel receptor had a negative effect on cell 
proliferation. Taken together our data are consistent with the view that FGFRL1 
acts as a decoy receptor for FGF ligands.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M300281200
PMID: 12813049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
