---
pmid: '15772346'
title: Loss of Swiss cheese/neuropathy target esterase activity causes disruption
  of phosphatidylcholine homeostasis and neuronal and glial death in adult Drosophila.
authors:
- Mühlig-Versen M
- da Cruz AB
- Tschäpe JA
- Moser M
- Büttner R
- Athenstaedt K
- Glynn P
- Kretzschmar D
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2005'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC1182176
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5097-04.2005
---

# Loss of Swiss cheese/neuropathy target esterase activity causes disruption of phosphatidylcholine homeostasis and neuronal and glial death in adult Drosophila.
**Authors:** Mühlig-Versen M, da Cruz AB, Tschäpe JA, Moser M, Büttner R, Athenstaedt K, Glynn P, Kretzschmar D
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5097-04.2005](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5097-04.2005)
**PMC:** [PMC1182176](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1182176/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2005 Mar 16;25(11):2865-73. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5097-04.2005.

Loss of Swiss cheese/neuropathy target esterase activity causes disruption of 
phosphatidylcholine homeostasis and neuronal and glial death in adult 
Drosophila.

Mühlig-Versen M(1), da Cruz AB, Tschäpe JA, Moser M, Büttner R, Athenstaedt K, 
Glynn P, Kretzschmar D.

Author information:
(1)Center for Research on Occupational and Environmental Toxicology, Oregon 
Health and Sciences University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA.

The Drosophila Swiss cheese (sws) mutant is characterized by progressive 
degeneration of the adult nervous system, glial hyperwrapping, and neuronal 
apoptosis. The Swiss cheese protein (SWS) shares 39% sequence identity with 
human neuropathy target esterase (NTE), and a brain-specific deletion of SWS/NTE 
in mice causes a similar pattern of progressive neuronal degeneration. NTE 
reacts with organophosphate compounds that cause a paralyzing axonal 
degeneration in humans and has been shown to degrade endoplasmic 
reticulum-associated phosphatidylcholine (PtdCho) in cultured mammalian cells. 
However, its function within the nervous system has remained unknown. Here, we 
show that both the fly and mouse SWS proteins can rescue the defects that arise 
in sws mutant flies, whereas a point mutation in the proposed active site cannot 
restore SWS function. Overexpression of catalytically active SWS caused 
formation of abnormal intracellular membraneous structures and cell death. 
Cell-specific expression revealed that not only neurons but also glia depend 
autonomously on SWS. In wild-type flies, endogenous SWS was detected by 
immmunohistochemistry in the endoplasmic reticulum (the primary site of PtdCho 
processing) of neurons and in some glia. sws mutant flies lacked NTE-like 
esterase activity and had increased levels of PtdCho. Conversely, overexpression 
of SWS resulted in increased esterase activity and reduced PtdCho. We conclude 
that SWS is essential for membrane lipid homeostasis and cell survival in both 
neurons and glia of the adult Drosophila brain and that NTE may play an 
analogous role in vertebrates.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5097-04.2005
PMCID: PMC1182176
PMID: 15772346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The Drosophila Swiss cheese ( sws ) mutant is characterized by progressive degeneration of the adult nervous system, glial hyperwrapping, and neuronal apoptosis. The Swiss cheese protein (SWS) shares 39% sequence identity with human neuropathy target esterase (NTE), and a brain-specific deletion of SWS/NTE in mice causes a similar pattern of progressive neuronal degeneration. NTE reacts with organophosphate compounds that cause a paralyzing axonal degeneration in humans and has been shown to degrade endoplasmic reticulum-associated phosphatidylcholine (PtdCho) in cultured mammalian cells. However, its function within the nervous system has remained unknown. Here, we show that both the fly and mouse SWS proteins can rescue the defects that arise in sws mutant flies, whereas a point mutation in the proposed active site cannot restore SWS function. Overexpression of catalytically active SWS caused formation of abnormal intracellular membraneous structures and cell death. Cell-specific expression revealed that not only neurons but also glia depend autonomously on SWS. In wild-type flies, endogenous SWS was detected by immmunohistochemistry in the endoplasmic reticulum (the primary site of PtdCho processing) of neurons and in some glia . sws mutant flies lacked NTE-like esterase activity and had increased levels of PtdCho. Conversely, overexpression of SWS resulted in increased esterase activity and reduced PtdCho. We conclude that SWS is essential for membrane lipid homeostasis and cell survival in both neurons and glia of the adult Drosophila brain and that NTE may play an analogous role in vertebrates.

Introduction

Age-dependent neurodegeneration in the adult nervous system is often characterized by a spectrum of abnormalities including neuronal and glial apoptosis, reactive gliosis or abnormal glial sprouting, and vacuolar lesions. We have characterized a number of Drosophila mutants that exhibit several of these degenerative phenotypes. In particular, the Swiss cheese ( sws ) mutant shows age-dependent neurodegeneration detectable by the formation of spongiform lesions within the CNS, accompanied by neuronal apoptosis ( Kretzschmar et al., 1997 ). In addition, glial cells in these animals form multilayered wrappings around neurons. In late wild-type pupae, glial cells form single-layered sheaths around neuronal cell bodies and axons. In sws mutant pupae, multilayered glial wrappings appear, which eventually form large whorls around degenerating neurons in adults.

The SWS protein shares homology with open reading frames in yeast, nematodes, and with vertebrate neuropathy target esterase (NTE) ( Lush et al., 1998 ). NTE is the molecular target of those organophosphorus compounds that induce delayed neuropathy (OPIDN) in vertebrates ( Johnson, 1990 ; Lotti, 1992 ; Atkins and Glynn, 2000 ; Glynn, 2000 ; Moretto, 2000 ). This neuropathy is characterized by swelling and degeneration of long axons in the CNS and peripheral nervous system (Dyer et al., 1991 , 1992 ). OPIDN was first brought to public attention by a poisoning epidemic in the United States in the 1920s ( Smith et al., 1930 ); however, the mechanisms leading to this syndrome and the function of NTE are still unknown.

In vitro , NTE is detected by its organophosphate (OP)-sensitive serine esterase activity, assayed by the hydrolysis of phenyl valerate ( Johnson, 1977 ). This assay provided a convenient means of quantifying NTE activity and measuring the effects of neuropathic OPs, but it did not provide insight into the endogenous substrate(s). Recently, in mammalian cell lines, NTE has been shown to degrade endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated phosphatidylcholine (PtdCho) and has been proposed to play a role in membrane lipid homeostasis ( Zaccheo et al., 2004 ). However, it remains to be determined whether PtdCho or other membrane lipids comprise substrates for NTE in vivo .

Disruption of NTE/SWS in mice caused embryonic lethality with defects in the formation of the labyrinth layer, survival of secondary giant cells, and blood vessel formation ( Winrow et al., 2003 ; Moser et al., 2004 ).

Notably, brain-specific deletions of NTE in mice caused phenotypes strikingly similar to sws ( Akassoglou et al., 2004 ). After 6 weeks of age, hippocampal and thalamic neurons displayed vacuolation, abnormal membranous folds, and myelin figures, whereas Purkinje cells underwent cell death. The remarkable similarity of the neurodegenerative phenotypes in fly and mice, together with the structural conservation of SWS/NTE, suggests that these proteins have a fundamental biological function in survival and integrity of the aging CNS.

In this study, we performed esterase assays to determine whether SWS shares the biochemical properties of NTE. We immunolocalized the fly protein to the endoplasmic reticulum, and we examined membrane lipid composition in the mutant. In addition, we performed transgenic rescue experiments to confirm that SWS and NTE are true orthologs as a means of investigating the conserved role of these proteins in maintaining neuronal survival.

Materials and Methods

Drosophila stocks. sws alleles have been described previously ( Kretzschmar et al., 1997 ). Canton S was used as wild type-stock. The loco -GAL4 line was kindly provided by C. Klämbt (Universitat Muenster, Muenster, Germany), and the tracheal-GAL4 line was provided by A. Brand (University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK). Actin-GAL4, glass multimer receptor (GMR)-GAL4, and elav -GAL4 were provided by the Bloomington Stock Center (Bloomington, IN). Stocks were maintained and raised under standard conditions.

sws-constructs. The Drosophila sws cDNA (GH08579) was obtained from the Berkeley Drosophila Genome Project (Berkeley, CA) and inserted in the P-element transformation vector pUAST, which was also used to obtain the murine sws transgene ( Moser et al., 2000 ). The serine 985 -to-aspartate mutation was created by substituting the AGC triplet by a GAC in a corresponding primer. A 357 bp PCR product containing this triplet was used to substitute this region in the wild-type cDNA.

Esterase assays. Frozen flies were homogenized (5% w/w) in 50 m m Tris-HCl and 1 m m EDTA. After brief centrifugation (500 × g ; 5 min), the homogenates were assayed as described by Johnson ( 1977 ). NTE-like activity is operationally defined as that portion of phenyl valerate-hydrolyzing activity that is resistant to paraoxon (40 μ m ; a non-neuropathic OP) but sensitive to mipafox (50 μ m ; a neuropathic OP). The homogenates were preincubated (37°C; 20 min) with paraoxon in the presence or absence of mipafox before substrate (phenyl valerate) was added, and the reaction was allowed to proceed for an additional 20 min. Activity was determined as the amount of phenol liberated by this reaction and expressed as NTE-like activity (i.e., the difference in the activity measured in the presence and absence of mipafox) per milligram of homogenate protein. Homogenates were prepared from ∼200 flies (2-5 d of age), and measurements were repeated at least twice, unless otherwise stated. Results are shown as mean values ± SEM.

Tissue sections for light and electron microscopy. Fly heads were prepared for light and electron microscopy as described by Kretzschmar et al. ( 1997 ). For light microscopy, 2 μm serial sections were cut and stained with 1% toluidine blue plus 1% borax. Ultrathin Epon plastic sections were poststained with 2% uranyl acetate followed by Reynold's lead citrate ( Reynolds, 1963 ) and stabilized for transmission electron microscopy by carbon coating. Analysis of the specimens was done with a Zeiss (Oberkochen, Germany) EM10C/VR electron microscope at 40-80 kV. Glial cell material was identified clearly by its characteristically higher electron density (Saint Marie and Carlson, 1983a , b ).

Immunohistochemistry. Paraffin sections were performed as described by Jäger and Fischbach ( 1989 ). The paraffin was removed with SafeClear (Fisher Scientific, Houston, TX), and the sections were rehydrated in graded ethanol. Sections were processed further as described by Buchner et al. ( 1989 ). An SWS fusion protein (QIAexpress system; Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was used to raise antisera in rabbits and was applied in a 1:100 dilution in PBS ( Buchner et al., 1989 ). An antibody against rat 78 kDa glucose-regulated protein Grp78 (Stressgen, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada) was used in a 1:1000 dilution to label the endoplasmic reticulum. Monoclonal antibodies against the neuronal protein embryonic lethal abnormal vision (ELAV) and the glial protein reversed polarity (REPO) were obtained from the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank (University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA). Supernatants were diluted 1:5 (REPO) and 1:100 (ELAV). Cyanine 2 (Cy2) and Cy3 secondary antibodies were obtained from Jackson ImmunoResearch (West Grove, PA).

Western blot. Western blots were performed as described by Tschape et al. ( 2002 ). Homogenates were prepared from fly heads from 3- to 6-d-old flies. The anti-sws antibody was used in a 1:500 dilution, and the protein was detected using the ECL system (Amersham Biosciences, Arlington Heights, IL). The detected SWS protein was ∼180 kDa larger than the predicted size of 160 kDa, which could be a result of protein modifications.

Lipid and sterol measurements. Twenty milligrams of heads from 8- to 10-d-old flies were homogenized mechanically, and chloroform/methanol was extracted as described by Folch et al. ( 1957 ). Phospholipids were separated by two-dimensional thin-layer chromatography on silica gel 60 plates (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) using chloroform/methanol/25% NH 3 (65:35:5; per volume) as the first solvent and chloroform/acetone/methanol/acetic acid/water (50:20:10:10:5; per volume) as the second solvent. Phospholipids were visualized on TLC plates by staining with iodine vapor, scraped off, and quantified ( Broekhuyse, 1968 ).

For the analysis of neutral lipid, extracts were applied to silica gel 60 plates with a sample applicator (Linomat IV; CAMAG, Basel, Switzerland), and chromatograms were developed in an ascending manner using light petroleum/diethyl ether/acetic acid (25:25:1; per volume) as the solvent for the first third of the total distance. Then the plates were dried briefly and further developed to two-thirds of the total distance by using light petroleum/diethyl ether (49:1; per volume). Quantitation of sterol and steryl ester was performed by densitometric scanning at 275 nm with ergosterol as a standard. Triacylglycerols (TAG) were visualized by postchromatographic staining using a chromatogram immersion device (CAMAG). Quantification of TAG was performed by densitometric scanning at 400 nm with triolein as a standard (NuCheck, Elysian, MN). Results are shown as mean values ± SEM from two to five independent measurements.

Discussion

The Drosophila sws mutant is characterized by progressive degeneration of the adult nervous system, associated with apoptotic cell death and the formation of spongiform lesions in the CNS. NTE, the mammalian ortholog of fly SWS, is also a molecular target of organophosphates. Organophosphate poisoning is a significant public health threat, contributing to three million acute severe cases of pesticide poisonings and 20,000 unintentional deaths each year (as estimated by the World Health Organization). Although NTE has been studied for over 20 years, its biological role is still unclear. The primary sequence of the Drosophila SWS protein is similar to mammalian NTE, and we have now confirmed the functional conservation of these proteins, as well. Expression of the murine gene in sws mutant flies can rescue the neurodegeneration phenotype induced by this mutation, as does expression of the fly gene (Figs. 1 , 2 ).

NTE mRNA ( Moser et al., 2000 ) and protein ( Glynn et al., 1998 ) are present in most or all vertebrate neurons in juvenile stages, with a more restricted pattern of expression in older animals ( Moser et al., 2000 ). In addition, vertebrate SWS/NTE is present in several non-neural tissues ( Johnson, 1982 ; Moser et al., 2000 ), although within the mouse nervous system, NTE immunostaining appears to be absent from glia ( Glynn et al., 1998 ). Moreover, recent studies have revealed a subcellular localization of NTE to the endoplasmic reticulum ( Li et al., 2003 ; Akassoglou et al., 2004 ). Similar to vertebrates, we have shown that he Drosophila SWS protein can be found in most or all neurons and primarily colocalizes with an ER protein. The observed ultrastructural defects seen in sws mutants, which are attributable to the disruptions in the ER, support a vital function of SWS in the maintenance of this organelle.

Our rescue experiments confirmed that SWS/NTE expression in neurons is essential for their survival. Surprisingly, however, we found that glial expression of this protein is also necessary for the integrity of the adult brain. The results of our studies using cell type-specific induction of SWS revealed that the mutant phenotype involves two independent aspects: axonal degeneration (visible by the spongiform lesions in the neuropil) and subsequent neuronal cell death were both ameliorated by neuronal-specific expression of SWS. In contrast, the glial phenotype, consisting of hyperwrapping and the formation of large membranous bodies, was rescued only by SWS/NTE expression in glia. These results show a cell-autonomous requirement of SWS in both cell types in the adult brain of Drosophila. SWS is also expressed in lower amounts during development; however, we did not detect any obvious defects in glial or neuronal differentiation in earlier stages. The expression of SWS in specific glial subpopulations as well as neurons was confirmed by immunohistochemical staining of brain sections. The previous failure to observe vertebrate SWS/NTE in glia of the mammalian brain may either have been a result of insufficient sensitivity of the detection procedure used in previous studies or may be the result of authentic differences in species-specific expression patterns.

These results suggest that only adult or aged neurons are critically dependent on SWS activity for their viability. Interestingly, toxicology studies in vertebrates have shown that older animals are substantially more sensitive to organophosphate-induced delayed neuropathy ( Johnson and Barnes, 1970 ; Moretto et al., 1991 ). Alternatively, it is possible that defects resulting from aberrant SWS/NTE function accumulate only gradually and therefore do not manifest at other developmental stages.

Our studies also demonstrate that the functional conservation between fly and vertebrate SWS/NTE extends to their catalytic activities, because fly SWS exhibits an esterase activity resembling that of mammalian NTE, as measured by OP-sensitive hydrolysis of phenyl valerate. From a structural point of view, Ser 985 in fly SWS aligns precisely with Ser 966 of vertebrate NTE, which has been implicated as the active site residue. The failure of the point mutation in Ser 985 to substitute wild-type SWS confirms the importance of the active site in vivo . More importantly, we found that the levels of PtdCho in extracts of fly heads were inversely related to the level of DSWS expression ( Fig. 8 ). These findings are consistent with recent observations that NTE in both yeast and cultured mammalian cell lines degrades ER-associated PtdCho ( Zaccheo et al., 2004 ). We also found that triacylglycerol levels in the fly brain changed in reciprocal manner compared with PtdCho levels. This result is consistent with the dynamics of lipid synthesis in mammalian cells, in which diacylglycerol has been shown to be the immediate pre-cursor for either PtdCho or triacylglycerol. Thus, when PtdCho synthesis is partially inhibited, triacylglycerol levels rise, whereas when PtdCho synthesis is increased, triacylglycerol falls ( Allan, 2000 ; Jackowski et al., 2000 ).

In addition, we found a severe reduction in sterol ester levels in the sws mutant. Cholesterol ester can be synthesized by transfer of an acyl group from PtdCho to cholesterol by lecithin acyltransferase (LCAT), a serum enzyme that acts on the surface of high-density lipoproteins ( Jonas, 2000 ). Although LCAT is primarily synthesized in the liver, smaller amounts can be found in the brain, and cultured glial cells secrete significant amounts into the surrounding culture medium ( Collet et al., 1999 ). However, the role of LCAT in the brain is not yet understood. SWS/NTE shows no significant sequence homology to LCAT, and an LCAT ortholog can be found in the Drosophila genome ( http://flybase.bio.indiana.edu ). Therefore, we assume that SWS/NTE does not act directly as an LCAT-like enzyme but might influence brain LCAT via an alternative pathway. Although additional studies are required to determine the role of SWS/NTE in cholesterol ester production, our biochemical results support the conclusion that SWS as well as NTE play a critical function in the regulation of membrane lipid composition in vivo .

If SWS/NTE does play a central role in the turnover of phospholipids associated with the ER membrane, then overexpression of this protein might be expected to cause deleterious changes in membrane composition and lead to aberrant membrane breakdown, particularly in the ER. This indeed appeared to be the consequence of overexpressing catalytically active DSWS in glia, an effect that was not seen when we overexpressed the serine-to-aspartate mutant form (excluding the possibility that the toxicity was simply attributable to high levels of SWS expression). Conversely, a lack of DSWS/NTE activity would allow the abnormal accumulation of ER membrane phospholipid, providing a rationale for the defects seen in ER membranes of aged sws mutant animals. In this aspect, the Drosophila mutant appears to be different from yeast lacking the NTE homolog YML059c, which do not show increased levels of PtdCho ( Zaccheo et al., 2004 ). This result suggests that in contrast to yeast, which control PtdCho levels by downregulating the rate of PtdCho synthesis, metazoan cells may require the activity of SWS/NTE-related enzymes to maintain PtdCho homeostasis. PtdCho is a major component of most membranes, and disturbances in PtdCho metabolism have been associated with growth arrest and apoptotic cell death ( Cui and Houweling, 2002 ; Wright et al., 2004 ). PtdCho depletion also induces expression of the ER-stress-related protein GADD153 (growth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible protein), which has been shown to have proapoptotic activity ( van der Sanden et al., 2003 ). Similarly, PtdCho-specific phospholipase C has been implicated in triggering apoptosis in cells deprived of survival factors ( Du et al., 2003 ). In addition, the enzymatic breakdown of phospholipids plays an important role in receptor-mediated signal transduction and cell communication ( Divecha and Irvine, 1995 ). Breakdown of PtdCho has been observed in many acute and chronic neurodegenerative disorders, although it is not clear whether this event is a cause or a consequence of these disorders ( Klein, 2000 ). Whereas there is ample evidence for the involvement of PtdCho breakdown in neurodegeneration, much less is known about the potential adverse effects of abnormally elevated PtdCho levels. Experiments in yeast suggest that excess PtdCho is intrinsically toxic to Golgi secretory function ( Xie et al., 2001 ). It has also been reported that elevated PtdCho levels can be found in specific brain regions of Alzheimer's patients ( Soderberg et al., 1992 ) and that PtdCho synthesis is increased in a dose-specific manner by amyloid β, the major component of the plaques found in Alzheimer's patients ( Koudinova et al., 2000 ). PtdCho and related choline compounds have a neuronal-specific function, in that they have been shown to promote the synthesis and transmission of neurotransmitters ( McDaniel et al., 2003 ). Thus, in addition to defects associated with membrane integrity, accumulation of excess PtdCho in neuronal axons and dendrites may also result in the misregulation of transmitter synthesis and release. Such an effect might further contribute to the degeneration of neurites and subsequent neuronal death, an effect that is compatible with the progressive appearance of vacuoles in the neuropil of sws mutant flies. The sws mutant thus provides an experimental model for functional studies of the role of SWS/NTE in maintaining neural integrity and can be used in future investigations to decipher the role of this conserved enzyme with respect to the mechanisms of OP-induced delayed neuropathy.
