---
pmid: '28111307'
title: JAK1 gain-of-function causes an autosomal dominant immune dysregulatory and
  hypereosinophilic syndrome.
authors:
- Del Bel KL
- Ragotte RJ
- Saferali A
- Lee S
- Vercauteren SM
- Mostafavi SA
- Schreiber RA
- Prendiville JS
- Phang MS
- Halparin J
- Au N
- Dean JM
- Priatel JJ
- Jewels E
- Junker AK
- Rogers PC
- Seear M
- McKinnon ML
- Turvey SE
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC12365696
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2016.12.957
---

# JAK1 gain-of-function causes an autosomal dominant immune dysregulatory and hypereosinophilic syndrome.
**Authors:** Del Bel KL, Ragotte RJ, Saferali A, Lee S, Vercauteren SM, Mostafavi SA, Schreiber RA, Prendiville JS, Phang MS, Halparin J, Au N, Dean JM, Priatel JJ, Jewels E, Junker AK, Rogers PC, Seear M, McKinnon ML, Turvey SE
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2016.12.957](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2016.12.957)
**PMC:** [PMC12365696](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12365696/)

## Abstract

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017 Jun;139(6):2016-2020.e5. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2016.12.957. Epub 2017 Jan 19.

JAK1 gain-of-function causes an autosomal dominant immune dysregulatory and 
hypereosinophilic syndrome.

Del Bel KL(1), Ragotte RJ(1), Saferali A(1), Lee S(1), Vercauteren SM(2), 
Mostafavi SA(3), Schreiber RA(1), Prendiville JS(1), Phang MS(1), Halparin J(1), 
Au N(2), Dean JM(1), Priatel JJ(2), Jewels E(1), Junker AK(1), Rogers PC(1), 
Seear M(1), McKinnon ML(4), Turvey SE(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, British Columbia Children's Hospital, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, British Columbia Children's 
Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, British Columbia Children's Hospital, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, British Columbia Children's Hospital, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. Electronic 
address: mmckinnon@cw.bc.ca.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, British Columbia Children's Hospital, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. Electronic address: 
sturvey@cw.bc.ca.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2016.12.957
PMID: 28111307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Inborn errors of immunity (IEI) are monogenic disorders of the immune system that frequently present with autoimmunity or autoinflammation, necessitating multi-specialty care. In many cases, patients may present for rheumatologic evaluation prior to a genetic diagnosis, highlighting the need for recognition of an underlying IEI with immune dysregulation. Here, we review IEI that can present with rheumatologic and autoimmune complications and the role of genetic testing for establishing a molecular diagnosis and devising personalized treatment plans to improve patient outcomes.

INTRODUCTION

Inborn errors of immunity (IEI) are a broad class of monogenic diseases that affect immune system function. The initial discovery of IEI in the 1950s-1960s were made in patients with infectious susceptibility and primary immune deficiencies; however, it is now well-recognized that the clinical spectrum of IEI encompasses autoimmunity, autoinflammation, bone marrow failure, lymphoproliferation, severe atopy, and/or malignancy. Several large cohort studies have identified autoimmunity, immune dysregulation, or autoinflammation in approximately one-third of patients with IEI ( 1 – 3 ), and inflammatory manifestations were the initial presentation in 18% of one cohort ( 4 ).

IEI presenting with symptoms that overlap with more common systemic autoimmune conditions represent a significant clinical challenge; however, early identification and treatment is associated with improved patient outcomes and frequently requires a multidisciplinary approach. Clinical challenges include identification, diagnosis, and immune modulating therapy for patients with rheumatologic disease associated with an IEI. Here, we review the IEIs that present with rheumatologic manifestations, discuss the clinical approach to identifying IEIs, interpretation of genetic testing, and treatments targeted toward IEI.

CONCLUSION

IEI can manifest with a wide array of rheumatologic presentations, and some clinical signs such as early-onset, treatment-refractory conditions, and multi-organ autoimmunity should raise a high index of suspicion that the patient may have an underlying IEI. Prompt recognition and treatment of IEI can allow for a precision diagnosis and guide therapeutic decisions. Genetic testing should be considered for any patients suspected to have a monogenic IEI leading to rheumatologic disease. With increased availability of genetic testing and an ever-growing number of known monogenic IEI, we may also be surprised to find IEI in those patients in whom there is initially low clinical concern, potentially avoiding the accumulation of autoimmunity and disease burden with early diagnosis.
