---
pmid: '28130356'
title: A Novel Human CAMK2A Mutation Disrupts Dendritic Morphology and Synaptic Transmission,
  and Causes ASD-Related Behaviors.
authors:
- Stephenson JR
- Wang X
- Perfitt TL
- Parrish WP
- Shonesy BC
- Marks CR
- Mortlock DP
- Nakagawa T
- Sutcliffe JS
- Colbran RJ
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5338762
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2068-16.2017
---

# A Novel Human CAMK2A Mutation Disrupts Dendritic Morphology and Synaptic Transmission, and Causes ASD-Related Behaviors.
**Authors:** Stephenson JR, Wang X, Perfitt TL, Parrish WP, Shonesy BC, Marks CR, Mortlock DP, Nakagawa T, Sutcliffe JS, Colbran RJ
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2068-16.2017](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2068-16.2017)
**PMC:** [PMC5338762](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5338762/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2017 Feb 22;37(8):2216-2233. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2068-16.2017. 
Epub 2017 Jan 27.

A Novel Human CAMK2A Mutation Disrupts Dendritic Morphology and Synaptic 
Transmission, and Causes ASD-Related Behaviors.

Stephenson JR(1), Wang X(2)(3), Perfitt TL(1), Parrish WP(1), Shonesy BC(1), 
Marks CR(1), Mortlock DP(1), Nakagawa T(1)(4), Sutcliffe JS(1)(5), Colbran 
RJ(6)(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics.
(2)Vanderbilt Brain Institute.
(3)Vanderbilt International Scholar Program.
(4)Center for Structural Biology.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, and.
(6)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, 
roger.colbran@vanderbilt.edu.
(7)Vanderbilt-Kennedy Center for Research on Human Development, Vanderbilt 
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232.

Characterizing the functional impact of novel mutations linked to autism 
spectrum disorder (ASD) provides a deeper mechanistic understanding of the 
underlying pathophysiological mechanisms. Here we show that a de novo Glu183 to 
Val (E183V) mutation in the CaMKIIα catalytic domain, identified in a proband 
diagnosed with ASD, decreases both CaMKIIα substrate phosphorylation and 
regulatory autophosphorylation, and that the mutated kinase acts in a 
dominant-negative manner to reduce CaMKIIα-WT autophosphorylation. The E183V 
mutation also reduces CaMKIIα binding to established ASD-linked proteins, such 
as Shank3 and subunits of l-type calcium channels and NMDA receptors, and 
increases CaMKIIα turnover in intact cells. In cultured neurons, the E183V 
mutation reduces CaMKIIα targeting to dendritic spines. Moreover, neuronal 
expression of CaMKIIα-E183V increases dendritic arborization and decreases both 
dendritic spine density and excitatory synaptic transmission. Mice with a 
knock-in CaMKIIα-E183V mutation have lower total forebrain CaMKIIα levels, with 
reduced targeting to synaptic subcellular fractions. The CaMKIIα-E183V mice also 
display aberrant behavioral phenotypes, including hyperactivity, social 
interaction deficits, and increased repetitive behaviors. Together, these data 
suggest that CaMKIIα plays a previously unappreciated role in ASD-related 
synaptic and behavioral phenotypes.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Many autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD)-linked mutations disrupt the function of synaptic proteins, but 
no single gene accounts for >1% of total ASD cases. The molecular networks and 
mechanisms that couple the primary deficits caused by these individual mutations 
to core behavioral symptoms of ASD remain poorly understood. Here, we provide 
the first characterization of a mutation in the gene encoding CaMKIIα linked to 
a specific neuropsychiatric disorder. Our findings demonstrate that this 
ASD-linked de novo CAMK2A mutation disrupts multiple CaMKII functions, induces 
synaptic deficits, and causes ASD-related behavioral alterations, providing 
novel insights into the synaptic mechanisms contributing to ASD.

Copyright © 2017 the authors 0270-6474/17/372217-18$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2068-16.2017
PMCID: PMC5338762
PMID: 28130356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Characterizing the functional impact of novel mutations linked to autism spectrum disorder (ASD) provides a deeper mechanistic understanding of the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms. Here we show that a de novo Glu183 to Val (E183V) mutation in the CaMKIIα catalytic domain, identified in a proband diagnosed with ASD, decreases both CaMKIIα substrate phosphorylation and regulatory autophosphorylation, and that the mutated kinase acts in a dominant-negative manner to reduce CaMKIIα-WT autophosphorylation. The E183V mutation also reduces CaMKIIα binding to established ASD-linked proteins, such as Shank3 and subunits of l -type calcium channels and NMDA receptors, and increases CaMKIIα turnover in intact cells. In cultured neurons, the E183V mutation reduces CaMKIIα targeting to dendritic spines. Moreover, neuronal expression of CaMKIIα-E183V increases dendritic arborization and decreases both dendritic spine density and excitatory synaptic transmission. Mice with a knock-in CaMKIIα-E183V mutation have lower total forebrain CaMKIIα levels, with reduced targeting to synaptic subcellular fractions. The CaMKIIα-E183V mice also display aberrant behavioral phenotypes, including hyperactivity, social interaction deficits, and increased repetitive behaviors. Together, these data suggest that CaMKIIα plays a previously unappreciated role in ASD-related synaptic and behavioral phenotypes.

SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Many autism spectrum disorder (ASD)-linked mutations disrupt the function of synaptic proteins, but no single gene accounts for >1% of total ASD cases. The molecular networks and mechanisms that couple the primary deficits caused by these individual mutations to core behavioral symptoms of ASD remain poorly understood. Here, we provide the first characterization of a mutation in the gene encoding CaMKIIα linked to a specific neuropsychiatric disorder. Our findings demonstrate that this ASD-linked de novo CAMK2A mutation disrupts multiple CaMKII functions, induces synaptic deficits, and causes ASD-related behavioral alterations, providing novel insights into the synaptic mechanisms contributing to ASD.

Introduction

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder that presents with multiple core symptoms, including social interaction and communication deficits, as well as enhanced repetitive behaviors ( Lord et al., 2000a ). Several hundred genetic mutations have been linked to ASD. Many of these mutations disrupt synaptic communication in the CNS, but the core molecular mechanisms responsible for ASD symptoms remain unclear ( State and Šestan, 2012 ; Krumm et al., 2014 ; Ronemus et al., 2014 ; Bourgeron, 2015 ). The identification and characterization of novel ASD-linked genetic variations have the potential to provide new insights that will facilitate development of a more unified mechanistic understanding of ASD. This study characterizes the functional impact of a de novo mutation in CAMK2A , the gene encoding the calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) α isoform, that was recently identified in an ASD proband, the first identified link between a naturally occurring CAMK2A mutation and a specific neuropsychiatric disorder.

CaMKII is an abundant multifunctional serine/threonine kinase with critical roles in synaptic plasticity, learning, and memory ( Lisman et al., 2012 ; Hell, 2014 ; Shonesy et al., 2014 ). The major neuronal CaMKIIα and/or β subunits each contain a catalytic kinase domain, a Ca 2+ /calmodulin-binding regulatory domain containing modulatory autophosphorylation sites, and an association domain that is necessary for assembly of 12-subunit holoenzymes ( Lisman et al., 2012 ; Hell, 2014 ; Shonesy et al., 2014 ). Increases of intracellular Ca 2+ result in Ca 2+ /calmodulin binding to the regulatory domains and CaMKII activation. Simultaneous activation of adjacent subunits in the holoenzyme stimulates intersubunit autophosphorylation at Thr286, which generates autonomous (Ca 2+ -independent) CaMKII activity. CaMKIIα phosphorylates NMDA ( Omkumar et al., 1996 ; Leonard et al., 1999 ; Strack et al., 2000 ) and AMPA ( Barria et al., 1997b ; Mammen et al., 1997 ; Coultrap et al., 2014 ) receptor subunits to enhance excitatory synaptic transmission, and facilitates Ca 2+ influx via voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels ( Welsby et al., 2003 ; Yasuda et al., 2003 ; Hudmon et al., 2005 ; Lee et al., 2006 ; Abiria and Colbran, 2010 ; Jenkins et al., 2010 ; Tavalin and Colbran, 2016 ). Activated CaMKIIα is targeted to dendritic spines and the postsynaptic density via interactions with various CaMKII associated proteins (CaMKAPs) ( Hell, 2014 ), including GluN2B NMDA receptor subunits ( Strack and Colbran, 1998 ; Leonard et al., 2002 ; Bayer et al., 2006 ; Halt et al., 2012 ).

Genetically engineered mice carrying knock-out, knock-in, or other transgenic CaMKII alleles exhibit varied behavioral abnormalities. For example, CaMKIIα knock-out mice have deficits in long-term potentiation, learning, and memory, increased activity, and aggressive behaviors ( Silva et al., 1992 ; Chen et al., 1994 ). Furthermore, mice deficient in autophosphorylation at either Thr286 or Thr305/Thr306 have impaired synaptic plasticity and deficits in spatial learning and reversal learning in the Morris water maze task, respectively ( Giese et al., 1998 ; Elgersma et al., 2002 ). The loss of Thr286 autophosphorylation in adolescent mice disrupts synaptic targeting of CaMKIIα in vivo and also reduces anxiety in the elevated plus maze ( Gustin et al., 2011 ). More recently, multiple studies have uncovered novel roles for CaMKII in amphetamine ( Loweth et al., 2010 ), cocaine ( Robison et al., 2013 ), and alcohol ( Easton et al., 2013 ) addiction and maladaptive behaviors. Moreover, abnormal CaMKII signaling has been linked to a variety of neuropsychiatric disorders ( Robison, 2014 ).

Here we show that a de novo CAMK2A missense mutation identified in an ASD proband in the Simons Simplex Collection ( Fischbach and Lord, 2010 ; Iossifov et al., 2014 ) (Family SSC ID: 14620) decreases CaMKIIα kinase activity and interactions with several synaptic CaMKAPs, and increases CaMKIIα turnover in cells. Neuronal expression of CaMKIIα-E183V disrupts dendritic morphology and basal synaptic transmission. Furthermore, a knock-in mutant mouse engineered to harbor this mutation using CRISPR-Cas9 technology displays core behaviors associated with ASD, including social interaction deficits and repetitive behaviors. Biochemical analyses revealed alterations in CaMKII autophosphorylation, synaptic localization, and protein levels in the brains of CaMKIIα-E183V mice. Together, our findings suggest that CaMKIIα can play an important role in the pathogenesis of ASD-related behaviors.

Discussion

CaMKII is among the most intensively studied neuronal proteins, with well-defined roles at excitatory synapses linked to LTP and spatial learning and memory (see Introduction). Studies described herein characterize at multiple levels the functional impact of the first human CAMK2A mutation identified in an individual diagnosed with any neuropsychiatric disorder, explicitly linking CaMKII to ASD-related behaviors, such as social interaction deficits and increased repetitive behaviors.

The de novo missense E183V CAMK2A mutation was recently detected in a proband with a typical ASD diagnosis ( Iossifov et al., 2014 ); social interaction deficits and repetitive/stereotyped behavior, as well as hyperactivity and anxiety ( Table 1 ). This mutation likely contributes to ASD risk in this proband because of: (1) prior knowledge of the neuronal roles of CaMKIIα, particularly binding to and regulating proteins strongly implicated in ASD, such as SHANK3 and GRIN2B ; (2) lack of other known significant genetic risk factors in this proband; (3) clear biochemical deficits caused by E183V mutation; (4) effects of CaMKIIα-E183V on dendritic morphology and synaptic function; and (5) ASD-related behavioral phenotypes of E183V knock-in mice.

Mice with a knock-in CaMKIIα-E183V mutation had novel behavioral deficits. Camk2a E183V/E183V mice displayed enhanced repetitive behaviors and deficits in social interactions ( Fig. 10 ), which are generally believed to mimic core ASD symptoms and are similar to other mouse ASD models ( Silverman et al., 2010 ). Homozygous mice were also hyperactive in an open field test, with reduced center time suggesting increased anxiety; hyperactivity and anxiety are frequent comorbid symptoms in ASD patients. Heterozygous mice had less severe phenotypes, but a striking deficit in the novelty phase of the social testing paradigm, which contains components of social memory and recognition ( Yang et al., 2011 ), and more modestly increased anxiety. Camk2a E183V/E183V mice also had a robust increase of repetitive vertical behaviors. Thus, the reduced marble-burying behavior of both Camk2a E183V/E183V and Camk2a WT/E183V mice was initially surprising. However, reduced marble burying was observed in other ASD-mouse models, perhaps indicating reduced exploration in a complex environment ( Balemans et al., 2010 ; Feyder et al., 2010 ; DeLorey et al., 2011 ; Moy et al., 2014 ). It is possible that the hyperactivity and/or increased anxiety of CaMKII-E183V KI mice contributes to social interaction deficits and reduced marble burying. Despite extensive studies of other CaMKII mutant mice, this is the first study showing that CaMKII mutation causes core ASD-related phenotypes.

The biochemical properties of CaMKIIα are profoundly affected by E183V mutation in the catalytic domain. First, catalytic activity is dramatically reduced. The CaMKIIα-E183V mutant retained some activity toward GluA1 AMPA receptor subunits (∼30% of WT) but had negligible activity toward a peptide substrate or by Thr286 autophosphorylation. This difference may relate to prior observations that substrates can interact with CaMKIIα in multiple ways (e.g., Coultrap et al., 2010 ) and that some CaMKII activators and inhibitors exhibit substrate-selective effects ( Jiao et al., 2011 ; Jalan-Sakrikar et al., 2012 ). Notably, CaMKIIα-E183V forms holoenzymes with CaMKIIα-WT, presumably accounting for the dominant-negative activity of CaMKIIα-E183V to reduce Thr286 autophosphorylation of CaMKIIα-WT. Second, CaMKIIα-E183V mutation disrupted binding to several CaMKAPs. Approximately 10% of the >100 CaMKAPs specifically associated with synaptic CaMKII holoenzymes ( Baucum et al., 2015 ) have been linked to ASD, including GluN2B; Shank-1, -2, and -3; SAPAP-1, -2, -3, -4; and Homer-1 ( Durand et al., 2007 ; Berkel et al., 2010 ; Pinto et al., 2010 ; O'Roak et al., 2012 ; Sato et al., 2012 ). Notably, Shank3 was one of the most abundant components of synaptic CaMKII holoenzyme complexes ( Baucum et al., 2015 ) and SHANK3 is among the most commonly mutated genes in ASD ( Moessner et al., 2007 ; Jiang and Ehlers, 2013 ). Moreover, E183V mutation disrupts Shank3 coimmunoprecipitation with CaMKIIα from transfected cells. CaMKIIα also interacts directly with and/or regulates other ASD-linked synaptic proteins, such as voltage-gated calcium channels and neuroligins ( Leonard et al., 1999 ; Abiria and Colbran, 2010 ; Jenkins et al., 2010 ; Bemben et al., 2014 ; Baucum et al., 2015 ). In combination, these data indicate that E183V mutation disrupts CaMKII association with an ASD-linked synaptic protein network. Further characterization of biochemical consequences of CaMKIIα-E183V mutation in vitro and in neurons seems likely to provide novel insights into molecular mechanisms underlying ASD.

The expression of CaMKIIα-E183V in neurons that endogenously express CaMKIIα-WT might mimic a heterozygous genotype and had a significant impact on dendritic morphology and synaptic transmission. CaMKIIα-WT was targeted to dendritic spines, as expected, but E183V mutation interfered with synaptic targeting, presumably reflecting reduced interactions with GluN2B, Shank3, and other CaMKAPs. Reduced Thr286 autophosphorylation may also contribute to the disrupted subcellular targeting ( McNeill and Colbran, 1995 ; Strack and Colbran, 1998 ; Shen and Meyer, 1999 ; Robison et al., 2005a ; Bayer et al., 2006 ; Bingol et al., 2010 ; Jiao et al., 2011 ). CaMKIIα-E183V expression strikingly decreased dendritic spine density and enhanced dendritic arborization relative to neurons expressing CaMKIIα-WT, reminiscent of prior observations that alterations in synaptic maturation are observed with ASD-linked mutations in other synaptic proteins in cultured neurons and in mice (e.g., Shank3) ( Peça et al., 2011 ; Durand et al., 2012 ). It is perhaps surprising that we did not detect changes in the distribution of different spine types following expression of CaMKIIα-E183V because persistent CaMKIIα translocation to spines has been linked to increased spine size ( Zhang et al., 2008 ; Pi et al., 2010 ). Moreover, increased dendritic arborization following CaMKIIα-E183V expression in neurons contrasts with the decreased arborization in striatal MSNs following transgenic overexpression of a CaMKII inhibitor ( Klug et al., 2012 ). CaMKII can regulate dendritic morphology by interacting with and/or phosphorylating numerous proteins, including kalirin-7 ( Xie et al., 2007 ), F-actin ( Kim et al., 2015 ), and Rem2, a small Ras-like GTPase ( Ghiretti et al., 2013 ). Therefore, the inhibitory actions of CaMKIIα-E183V on endogenous CaMKIIα and/or CaMKIIβ may disrupt one or more of these pathways to affect dendritic morphology. Moreover, the effects of CaMKIIα-E183V expression on neuronal morphology may be cell-type specific.

Expression of CaMKIIα-E183V in cultured neurons also reduced mEPSC amplitude and frequency compared with neurons expressing CaMKIIα-WT. Impaired basal synaptic transmission and/or synaptic plasticity have been observed with ASD-linked mutations of other synaptic proteins. For example, expression of Shank3 mutants reduces mEPSC amplitude and frequency in dissociated hippocampal neurons ( Durand et al., 2012 ), and basal synaptic transmission is altered in Shank3 heterozygous mice ( Peça et al., 2011 ). Mutations in the neuroligin family of postsynaptic density proteins have also been linked to ASD ( Ylisaukko-oja et al., 2005 ), and CaMKIIα phosphorylates neuroligin-1, regulating its surface expression and excitatory synaptic transmission ( Bemben et al., 2014 ). Overexpression of an ASD-associated neuroligin-3 mutant also reduces basal synaptic transmission in cultured neurons compared with WT neuroligin-3 ( Gutierrez et al., 2009 ). It will be important to investigate the impact of CaMKIIα-E183V mutation on synaptic transmission and plasticity in multiple brain regions in future studies.

Biochemical analyses indicate that total CaMKIIα protein levels are reduced in Camk2a E183V/E183V and Camk2a WT/E183V mice, perhaps due to increased polyubiquitylation and turnover of CaMKIIα-E183V. Furthermore, CaMKIIα-E183V can act in a dominant manner to enhance CaMKIIα-WT degradation when the two proteins are coexpressed in heterologous cells, in addition to its dominant-negative actions to reduce autophosphorylation (see above). CaMKIIα synaptic targeting and autophosphorylation are disrupted in both Camk2a E183V/E183V and Camk2a WT/E183V mice, and CaMKIIβ autophosphorylation is reduced in Camk2a E183V/E183V mice, providing evidence for a dominant-negative impact of CaMKIIα-E183V on both isoforms. Further studies of the cellular mechanisms controlling CaMKIIα turnover are clearly warranted.

Mice overexpressing or underexpressing CaMKIIα or with mutated Camk2a alleles that disrupt CaMKIIα signaling have revealed diverse cellular and behavioral roles relevant to psychiatric disorders ( Elgersma et al., 2004 ; Robison, 2014 ). Hyperactivity was observed in heterozygous CaMKIIα null mice with ∼50% lower CaMKIIα levels ( Yamasaki et al., 2008 ) and in CaMKIIα-T286A KI mice with reduced kinase activity, but no change in expression levels ( Easton et al., 2011 ; Shonesy et al., 2013 ), similar to Camk2a E183V/E183V mice. However, CaMKIIα-T286A KI mice displayed reduced anxiety in a light/dark box test and elevated plus maze ( Easton et al., 2011 ; Gustin et al., 2011 ), but not in an open-field test ( Easton et al., 2011 ), in contrast to Camk2a E183V/E183V mice. In addition, dendritic outgrowth of hippocampal neurons is reduced in heterozygous CaMKIIα null mice ( Yamasaki et al., 2008 ). Moreover, mice with an inactivating K42R knock-in mutation in CaMKIIα have normal CaMKIIα expression and synaptic targeting ( Yamagata et al., 2009 ). In contrast, neuronal expression of CaMKIIα-E183V disrupts synaptic targeting and enhances dendritic arborization while reducing spine density ( Fig. 5 ). Total levels of CaMKIIα were reduced in Camk2a E183V/E183V and Camk2a WT/E183V mice, with decreased relative synaptic targeting Camk2a E183V/E183V mice. Thus, our initial studies indicate that the E183V mutation has relatively unique effects compared with other CaMKIIα mutations. However, elucidating relationships between the molecular, cellular, and behavioral consequences of E183V mutation will require further investigations.

Some studies indicate that CaMKII has indirect roles in developmental disorders with symptoms that overlap those of ASD. For example, the Fragile X mental retardation protein directly regulates CaMKIIα mRNA translation ( Darnell et al., 2011 ). Moreover, CaMKII hyper-phosphorylates Homer proteins in a Fragile X mouse model, and reducing CaMKIIα levels or activity rescues behavioral phenotypes in these mice ( Guo et al., 2015 ). Similarly, CaMKII is hyper-autophosphorylated in an Angelman syndrome mouse model, and preventing CaMKIIα Thr306 phosphorylation rescues multiple behavioral phenotypes of these mice ( van Woerden et al., 2007 ). However, the current findings provide strong support for a more direct role for CaMKIIα in ASD-related synaptic and behavioral phenotypes.

In conclusion, the E183V mutation of CaMKIIα profoundly affects multiple biochemical activities, resulting in dysregulation of dendritic morphology and synaptic transmission, and ultimately causes robust ASD-like behavioral phenotypes in mice. Thus, our studies identified a novel role for CaMKII in a synaptic signaling protein network that modulates ASD-related behaviors. Ultimately, it will be important to integrate this novel perspective with other information about this network to develop a more comprehensive understanding of the molecular disruptions that cause ASD at the synaptic and circuit levels.
