---
pmid: '15800615'
title: CDK-dependent phosphorylation of BRCA2 as a regulatory mechanism for recombinational
  repair.
authors:
- Esashi F
- Christ N
- Gannon J
- Liu Y
- Hunt T
- Jasin M
- West SC
journal: Nature
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature03404
---

# CDK-dependent phosphorylation of BRCA2 as a regulatory mechanism for recombinational repair.
**Authors:** Esashi F, Christ N, Gannon J, Liu Y, Hunt T, Jasin M, West SC
**Journal:** Nature (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature03404](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03404)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2005 Mar 31;434(7033):598-604. doi: 10.1038/nature03404.

CDK-dependent phosphorylation of BRCA2 as a regulatory mechanism for 
recombinational repair.

Esashi F(1), Christ N, Gannon J, Liu Y, Hunt T, Jasin M, West SC.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK, London Research Institute, Clare Hall Laboratories, South 
Mimms, Hertfordshire EN6 3LD, UK.

Inherited mutations in BRCA2 are associated with a predisposition to early-onset 
breast cancers. The underlying basis of tumorigenesis is thought to be linked to 
defects in DNA double-strand break repair by homologous recombination. Here we 
show that the carboxy-terminal region of BRCA2, which interacts directly with 
the essential recombination protein RAD51, contains a site (serine 3291; S3291) 
that is phosphorylated by cyclin-dependent kinases. Phosphorylation of S3291 is 
low in S phase when recombination is active, but increases as cells progress 
towards mitosis. This modification blocks C-terminal interactions between BRCA2 
and RAD51. However, DNA damage overcomes cell cycle regulation by decreasing 
S3291 phosphorylation and stimulating interactions with RAD51. These results 
indicate that S3291 phosphorylation might provide a molecular switch to regulate 
RAD51 recombination activity, providing new insight into why BRCA2 C-terminal 
deletions lead to radiation sensitivity and cancer predisposition.

DOI: 10.1038/nature03404
PMID: 15800615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
