---
pmid: '18533146'
title: An FGF-WNT gene regulatory network controls lung mesenchyme development.
authors:
- Yin Y
- White AC
- Huh SH
- Hilton MJ
- Kanazawa H
- Long F
- Ornitz DM
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC2757945
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.04.009
---

# An FGF-WNT gene regulatory network controls lung mesenchyme development.
**Authors:** Yin Y, White AC, Huh SH, Hilton MJ, Kanazawa H, Long F, Ornitz DM
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.04.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.04.009)
**PMC:** [PMC2757945](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2757945/)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2008 Jul 15;319(2):426-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.04.009. Epub
2008  Jun 3.

An FGF-WNT gene regulatory network controls lung mesenchyme development.

Yin Y(1), White AC, Huh SH, Hilton MJ, Kanazawa H, Long F, Ornitz DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Campus Box 8103, 660 S Euclid Avenue, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Lung mesenchyme is a critical determinant of the shape and size of the lung, the 
extent and patterning of epithelial branching, and the formation of the 
pulmonary vasculature and interstitial mesenchymal components of the adult lung. 
Fibroblast growth factor 9 (FGF9) is a critical regulator of lung mesenchymal 
growth; however, upstream mechanisms that modulate the FGF mesenchymal signal 
and the downstream targets of mesenchymal FGF signaling are poorly understood. 
Here we have identified a robust regulatory network in which mesenchymal FGF 
signaling regulates beta-Catenin mediated WNT signaling in lung mesenchyme. By 
conditionally inactivating beta-Catenin in lung mesenchyme, we show that 
mesenchymal WNT-beta-Catenin signaling is essential for lung development and 
acts to regulate the cell cycle G1 to S transition and the FGF responsiveness of 
mesenchyme. Together, both FGF and WNT signaling pathways function to sustain 
mesenchymal growth and coordinate epithelial morphogenesis during the 
pseudoglandular stage of lung development.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.04.009
PMCID: PMC2757945
PMID: 18533146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Lung mesenchyme is a critical determinant of the shape and size of the lung, the extent and patterning of epithelial branching, and the formation of the pulmonary vasculature and interstitial mesenchymal components of the adult lung. Fibroblast growth factor 9 (FGF9) is a critical regulator of lung mesenchymal growth; however, upstream mechanisms that modulate the FGF mesenchymal signal and the downstream targets of mesenchymal FGF signaling are poorly understood. Here we have identified a robust regulatory network in which mesenchymal FGF signaling regulates β-Catenin mediated WNT signaling in lung mesenchyme. By conditionally inactivating β-Catenin in lung mesenchyme, we show that mesenchymal WNT-β-Catenin signaling is essential for lung development and acts to regulate the cell cycle G1 to S transition and the FGF responsiveness of mesenchyme. Together, both FGF and WNT signaling pathways function to sustain mesenchymal growth and coordinate epithelial morphogenesis during the pseudoglandular stage of lung development.

Introduction

Mouse lung development is initiated on embryonic day 9.5 (E9.5) with the formation of two endodermal buds off the ventrolateral foregut. Lung buds invade the surrounding splanchnic mesoderm and overlying mesothelium to establish a lung primordium initially composed of three tissue layers, epithelium (endoderm), mesoderm and mesothelium ( Hogan, 1999 ). As the lung buds grow and enter the pseudoglandular stage of development (E9.5–16), the mesenchyme forms two morphologically and molecularly distinct layers, the sub-mesothelial layer and the sub-epithelial layer ( White et al., 2006 ). These mesenchymal layers express unique intercellular signaling molecules, such as WNT2a and FGF10 in the sub-mesothelial layer and Noggin in the sub-epithelial layer ( Bellusci et al., 1996 ; Mailleux et al., 2005 ; Weaver et al., 2003 ; White et al., 2006 ). Growth and morphogenesis of the lung require intercellular signaling interactions between all primary cell layers of the lung ( Cardoso and Lu, 2006 ; Shannon and Hyatt, 2004 ; Warburton et al., 2005 ).

Fgf9 is expressed in the outermost layer of the lung, the mesothelium, and in lung epithelium, and has been identified as a key factor that signals to mesenchyme to regulate proliferation, differentiation and the expression of other factors that in turn regulate epithelial development ( Colvin et al., 1999 ; Colvin et al., 2001 ). Mesenchymal forms of FGF receptors 1 and 2 have been shown to mediate the FGF9 signal ( White et al., 2006 ). Epithelial FGFs, such as FGF9, often regulate the expression of mesenchymal FGFs and other signaling molecules that in turn regulate epithelial and mesenchymal development. In a screen of candidate genes that are expressed in lung mesenchyme and that could be regulated by mesenchymal FGF signaling, Wnt2a was found to be significantly down-regulated in lungs of mice lacking Fgf9 ( Fgf9 −/− ) (see Fig. 1 ). This suggested a link between FGF and WNT-β-Catenin signaling in lung mesenchyme and that regulation of WNT-β-Catenin signaling may be responsible for some of the lung phenotypes observed in Fgf9 −/− embryos.

WNT signaling is essential for embryonic patterning and cell fate determination ( Moon, 2005 ). At least three intracellular signaling pathways mediate WNT signaling, the WNT-β-Catenin pathway, the WNT/Ca 2+ pathway and the planar cell polarity (PCP) pathway. WNT-β-Catenin signaling through frizzled (FZ) receptors and low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP) 5 and 6 co-receptors lead to activation of disheveled (DVL), inhibition of GSK3β, and stabilization and cytosolic accumulation of β-Catenin. Increased cytosolic levels of β-Catenin lead to its nuclear translocation and to the formation of active transcription factor complexes of β-Catenin with members of the T Cell Factor (LEF1, TCF1, TCF3, TCF4) transcription factor family, PITX2 and SOX17 ( Brantjes et al., 2002 ; Briata et al., 2003 ; Kioussi et al., 2002 ; Vadlamudi et al., 2005 ; Zorn et al., 1999 ). Downstream targets of WNT-β-Catenin signaling include the cell cycle regulator, CyclinD1 , and transcription factors, N-myc , Lef1 and Pitx2 ( Hovanes et al., 2001 ; Kioussi et al., 2002 ; Shu et al., 2005 ; Tetsu and McCormick, 1999 ). In embryonic lung, nuclear β-Catenin, LEF1 and PITX2 have been detected in the epithelium and in adjacent mesenchyme ( Hjalt et al., 2000 ; Mucenski et al., 2003 ; Tebar et al., 2001 ). Similarly, TOPGAL and BATGAL , WNT-β-Catenin reporter genes that detect a subset of sites of WNT-β-Catenin activity, are active in lung epithelium and in adjacent mesenchyme ( De Langhe et al., 2005 ; Maretto et al., 2003 ; Okubo and Hogan, 2004 ; Pongracz and Stockley, 2006 ; Shu et al., 2005 ).

WNT-β-Catenin signaling has been investigated in lung epithelium through conditional inactivation of β-Catenin or overexpression of the WNT signaling antagonist dickkopf1 (DKK1). Both approaches resulted in defects in distal lung bud formation, possibly due to disruption of FGF10-FGFR2b signaling ( Mucenski et al., 2003 ; Shu et al., 2005 ). Three Wnts ( Wnt2a , Wnt2b , Wnt7b ) that typically signal through the WNT-β-Catenin pathway are expressed during lung development. Inactivation of Wnt7b , which is expressed in distal lung epithelium, results in severe lung hypoplasia due to defects in branching morphogenesis, cell proliferation, epithelial differentiation and loss of vascular smooth muscle integrity ( Shu et al., 2002 ). Wnt2a is highly expressed in the distal mesenchyme ( Bellusci et al., 1996 ; Monkley et al., 1996 ) but Wnt2a targeted mice were reported to have normal lung development ( Monkley et al., 1996 ). Wnt2b (formerly called Wnt13 ) is also expressed in lung mesenchyme during early stages of lung development ( Katoh et al., 1996 ; Katoh et al., 2000 ; Zakin et al., 1998 ). This leaves open the possibility of functional redundancy between these two related and similarly expressed genes. Two Wnts ( Wnt5a , Wnt11 ) that typically signal through non-canonical pathways are expressed in lung epithelium and mesenchyme. Wnt5a is expressed in lung epithelium and adjacent mesenchyme and inactivation of Wnt5a leads to over-branching of the epithelial airway and thickening of the mesenchymal interstitium ( Li et al., 2005 , 2002 ). Wnt11 is expressed both in the lung epithelium and mesenchyme, but its function during lung development is not clear ( Lako et al., 1998 ).

Although WNT-β-Catenin signaling is clearly important for lung epithelial development, its role in lung mesenchyme has not been directly examined. Here we identify an essential role for mesenchymal WNT-β-Catenin signaling by conditionally inactivating β-Catenin specifically in lung mesenchyme. We furthermore identify a reciprocal signaling loop in lung mesenchyme in which mesothelial/epithelial to mesenchymal FGF signals regulate Wnt2a expression and WNT-β-Catenin signaling, and mesenchymal WNT-β-Catenin signaling regulates FGFR1 and FGFR2 expression and, consequently, the level of FGF signaling. Disruption of any component of this signaling network results in defects in lung mesenchymal development and consequent defects in epithelial morphogenesis.

Discussion

We have identified a robust regulatory circuit in which epithelial to mesenchymal FGF signaling regulates the expression of a Wnt ligand and the level of WNT-β-Catenin signaling, and in which mesenchymal WNT-β-Catenin signaling regulates the expression of FGF receptors and the level of mesenchymal FGF signaling ( Fig. 9 ). The only external (non-mesenchymal) factor that has thus far been identified that can modulate this signaling system is FGF9, which is produced by the mesothelial lining of the lung and by airway epithelium, and potentially WNT7b, which is produced in airway epithelium. The primary output of this system appears to be regulation of mesenchymal proliferation, but clearly other mesenchymal factors that regulate lung epithelial proliferation, survival and differentiation must also act downstream of FGF and/or β-Catenin.

Two predictions can be derived from the FGF–WNT interaction model ( Fig. 9 ). First: down-regulation or inhibition of any component of this system should diminish the output of the entire system. Second: up-regulation of any component of the system should reinforce the entire system. In vitro organ culture experiments and in vivo genetic experiments support the circular and self-sustaining nature of this signaling network. For example, lung tissue lacking mesenchymal β-Catenin was predicted and shown to down-regulate mesenchymal responsiveness to FGF9. Similarly, loss of mesenchymal FGF signaling resulted in diminished WNT-β-Catenin signaling, loss of Fgfr expression and inability of the tissue to be rescued by treatment with FGF9. However, phenotypic differences resulting from loss of either mesenchymal β-Catenin or mesenchymal FGFR1 and FGFR2 indicate that other factors must also feed into this signaling circuit to sustain mesenchymal viability. Apparent differences could also be due to variation in the timing or efficiency of Cre-mediated inactivation of β-Catenin and Fgfrs 1 and 2 , versus complete loss of mesenchymal FGF signaling in Fgf9 −/− lungs. In FGF loss of function models ( Fgf9 −/− and Fgfr1/2 Dermo1 ), the lung becomes atrophic by birth but does not exhibit widespread cell death ( Colvin et al., 2001 ; White et al., 2006 ). By contrast, β- Catenin Dermo1 lungs exhibit widespread apoptosis by E18.5. These observations provide further evidence that these two pathways are not equivalent and that β-Catenin signaling may have a more important role in mesenchymal cell survival. Furthermore, some intrinsic or extrinsic signal(s) likely maintains low-level mesenchymal β-Catenin signaling and cell viability in the absence of FGF signaling. This is supported by the observed reduction, but not elimination, of WNT-β-Catenin activity ( Lef1 expression) in Fgf9 −/− lung mesenchyme. However, besides FGF9 and WNT7b, factors that regulate mesenchymal WNT-β-Catenin signaling have not been identified.

Wnt7b is expressed in lung epithelium ( Pepicelli et al., 1998 ; Weidenfeld et al., 2002 ). Wnt7b −/− embryos have reduced lung mesenchymal proliferation and defects in lung vascular smooth muscle ( Shu et al., 2002 ). It is, therefore, likely that WNT7b signals directly to adjacent sub-epithelial mesenchyme and acts synergistically or redundantly with WNT2a ( Fig. 9 ). Wang et al. (2005) have shown that WNT7b can activate FZD1, 4 and 7 and that these WNT receptors are expressed in lung mesenchyme and in vascular smooth muscle precursors; however, direct targets of WNT-β-Catenin signaling were not examined in lung mesenchyme of Wnt7b −/− mice. Supporting the idea that WNT7b could regulate mesenchymal WNT-β-Catenin activity independent of FGF9, we showed that the expression of Wnt7b was increased in Fgf9 −/− lungs. Thus, WNT7b is likely to be a second independent external factor that can modulate the mesenchymal WNT-β-Catenin–FGFR regulatory circuit.

Lef1 , a target of WNT-β-Catenin signaling, appears to be uniformly expressed throughout distal mesenchyme. This suggests that Wnt2a , which is expressed in sub-mesothelial mesenchyme, might support both autocrine signaling to sub-mesothelial mesenchyme and paracrine signaling to sub-epithelial mesenchyme. Although a lung mesenchymal phenotype was not reported for Wnt2a −/− mice ( Monkley et al., 1996 ) and the original knockout line was not saved, a second, recently constructed line of Wnt2a −/− mice shows decreased lung mesenchymal proliferation (E. Morrisey, personal communication). Additionally, Wnt7b −/− mice show decreased lung mesenchymal proliferation ( Shu et al., 2002 ). These data support a potential role for these ligands acting together in the regulation of mesenchymal WNT-β-Catenin signaling. To demonstrate this in vivo , future epistasis studies will be required in which Wnt2a and Wnt7b double heterozygous mice are examined.

To address the contribution of WNT-β-Catenin signaling in lung epithelium, several labs have conditionally inactivated β-Catenin in epithelium or overexpressed the WNT antagonist, DKK, in epithelium ( De Langhe et al., 2005 ; Mucenski et al., 2003 ; Shu et al., 2005 ). These studies showed that WNT-β-Catenin signaling regulates the expression of N-Myc , Bmp4 and Fgfr2b in lung epithelium and regulates the extent of branching morphogenesis. Down-regulation of epithelial Fgfr2b could account for the observed defects in branching morphogenesis in these mice. Importantly, the identity of the WNT ligand(s) that regulates epithelial WNT-β-Catenin signaling is not known; however, in addition to activating FZD1, 4 and 7 in lung mesenchyme, WNT7b can activate FZD10, which is expressed in lung epithelium ( Wang et al., 2005 ). A possible autocrine role for WNT7b in epithelium is supported by observed defective epithelial differentiation in Wnt7b −/− lung tissue ( Shu et al., 2002 ).

In summary, FGF9, and most likely WNT7b, are two ligands that can independently signal from mesothelial (FGF9) and epithelial (FGF9 and WNT7b) cells to lung mesenchyme to regulate growth. The positive feedback loop within the mesenchymal compartment ( Wnt2a , FGFR1 , FGFR2 and β-Catenin) allows input from both FGF and WNT signaling systems to modulate the output of the entire system, thus providing a mechanism to tightly regulate mesenchymal lung development and, indirectly, epithelial morphogenesis.
