---
pmid: '11129957'
title: Role of endogenous regucalcin in protein tyrosine phosphatase regulation in
  the cloned rat hepatoma cells (H4-II-E).
authors:
- Inagaki S
- Misawa H
- Yamaguchi M
journal: Mol Cell Biochem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1023/a:1007100631753
---

# Role of endogenous regucalcin in protein tyrosine phosphatase regulation in the cloned rat hepatoma cells (H4-II-E).
**Authors:** Inagaki S, Misawa H, Yamaguchi M
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biochem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1023/a:1007100631753](https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1007100631753)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biochem. 2000 Oct;213(1-2):43-50. doi: 10.1023/a:1007100631753.

Role of endogenous regucalcin in protein tyrosine phosphatase regulation in the 
cloned rat hepatoma cells (H4-II-E).

Inagaki S(1), Misawa H, Yamaguchi M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology and Molecular Metabolism, Graduate School of 
Nutritional Sciences, University of Shizuoka, Japan.

Regucalcin, a regulatory protein of Ca2+ signaling, is mainly present in liver 
cells. The role of regucalcin in hepatoma cells, however, has not been 
clarified. The role of endogenous regucalcin in the regulation of protein 
tyrosine phosphatase activity in the cloned rat hepatoma cells (H4-II-E) was 
investigated. Hepatoma cells were cultured for 3 days in a medium containing 
serum (10% fetal bovine serum). After subconfluency, the cells were used for the 
assay of protein phosphatase activity toward phosphotyrosine. The expression of 
regucalcin in hepatoma cells was detected by Western blotting using 
anti-regucalcin antibody. Protein tyrosine phosphatase activity was exhibited in 
the cytosol of hepatoma cells. The enzyme activity in the cytosol of hepatoma 
cells was significantly elevated by the addition of calcium chloride 
(10(-6)-10(-4) M) in the reaction mixture. This elevation was completely blocked 
by the addition of trifluoperazine (TFP: 2.5 x 10(-6) M), an antagonist of 
calmodulin. The addition of regucalcin (10(-7) M) caused a complete inhibition 
of the calcium (10(-4) M)-increased enzyme activity. The presence of 
anti-regucalcin monoclonal antibody (25, 50, and 100 ng/ml) in the enzyme 
reaction mixture produced a significant increase in protein tyrosine phosphatase 
activity in the cytosols of hepatoma cells and normal liver cells. This increase 
was completely prevented by regucalcin addition. The effect of antibody (50 
ng/ml) in elevating the enzyme activity was partly inhibited by vanadate (10(-4) 
M). Protein tyrosine phosphatase activity was significantly elevated by the 
culture with Bay K 8644, a Ca2+-channel agonist. This increase was blocked by 
TFP addition in the enzyme reaction mixture, and it was enhanced in the presence 
of anti-regucalcin antibody. The present study demonstrates that regucalcin is 
expressed in hepatoma cells (H4-II-E), and that the protein may have an 
inhibitory effect on Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein tyrosine phosphatase 
activity in the cells.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1007100631753
PMID: 11129957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
