---
pmid: '23023748'
title: Ethylene glycol metabolism by Pseudomonas putida.
authors:
- Mückschel B
- Simon O
- Klebensberger J
- Graf N
- Rosche B
- Altenbuchner J
- Pfannstiel J
- Huber A
- Hauer B
journal: Appl Environ Microbiol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3502918
doi: 10.1128/AEM.02062-12
---

# Ethylene glycol metabolism by Pseudomonas putida.
**Authors:** Mückschel B, Simon O, Klebensberger J, Graf N, Rosche B, Altenbuchner J, Pfannstiel J, Huber A, Hauer B
**Journal:** Appl Environ Microbiol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1128/AEM.02062-12](https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02062-12)
**PMC:** [PMC3502918](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3502918/)

## Abstract

1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2012 Dec;78(24):8531-9. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02062-12.
Epub  2012 Sep 28.

Ethylene glycol metabolism by Pseudomonas putida.

Mückschel B(1), Simon O, Klebensberger J, Graf N, Rosche B, Altenbuchner J, 
Pfannstiel J, Huber A, Hauer B.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Technical Biochemistry, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, 
Germany.

In this study, we investigated the metabolism of ethylene glycol in the 
Pseudomonas putida strains KT2440 and JM37 by employing growth and bioconversion 
experiments, directed mutagenesis, and proteome analysis. We found that strain 
JM37 grew rapidly with ethylene glycol as a sole source of carbon and energy, 
while strain KT2440 did not grow within 2 days of incubation under the same 
conditions. However, bioconversion experiments revealed metabolism of ethylene 
glycol by both strains, with the temporal accumulation of glycolic acid and 
glyoxylic acid for strain KT2440. This accumulation was further increased by 
targeted mutagenesis. The key enzymes and specific differences between the two 
strains were identified by comparative proteomics. In P. putida JM37, tartronate 
semialdehyde synthase (Gcl), malate synthase (GlcB), and isocitrate lyase (AceA) 
were found to be induced in the presence of ethylene glycol or glyoxylic acid. 
Under the same conditions, strain KT2440 showed induction of AceA only. Despite 
this difference, the two strains were found to use similar periplasmic 
dehydrogenases for the initial oxidation step of ethylene glycol, namely, the 
two redundant pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ)-dependent enzymes PedE and PedH. 
From these results we constructed a new pathway for the metabolism of ethylene 
glycol in P. putida. Furthermore, we conclude that Pseudomonas putida might 
serve as a useful platform from which to establish a whole-cell biocatalyst for 
the production of glyoxylic acid from ethylene glycol.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02062-12
PMCID: PMC3502918
PMID: 23023748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In this study, we investigated the metabolism of ethylene glycol in the Pseudomonas putida strains KT2440 and JM37 by employing growth and bioconversion experiments, directed mutagenesis, and proteome analysis. We found that strain JM37 grew rapidly with ethylene glycol as a sole source of carbon and energy, while strain KT2440 did not grow within 2 days of incubation under the same conditions. However, bioconversion experiments revealed metabolism of ethylene glycol by both strains, with the temporal accumulation of glycolic acid and glyoxylic acid for strain KT2440. This accumulation was further increased by targeted mutagenesis. The key enzymes and specific differences between the two strains were identified by comparative proteomics. In P. putida JM37, tartronate semialdehyde synthase (Gcl), malate synthase (GlcB), and isocitrate lyase (AceA) were found to be induced in the presence of ethylene glycol or glyoxylic acid. Under the same conditions, strain KT2440 showed induction of AceA only. Despite this difference, the two strains were found to use similar periplasmic dehydrogenases for the initial oxidation step of ethylene glycol, namely, the two redundant pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ)-dependent enzymes PedE and PedH. From these results we constructed a new pathway for the metabolism of ethylene glycol in P. putida . Furthermore, we conclude that Pseudomonas putida might serve as a useful platform from which to establish a whole-cell biocatalyst for the production of glyoxylic acid from ethylene glycol.

INTRODUCTION

Ethylene glycol is an important starting material for many applications in the chemical industry and is readily available in large quantities at low cost. Besides its application in antifreeze solutions, it is used for the chemical synthesis of glyoxal, glycolic acid, and glyoxylic acid. Glyoxylic acid serves as an important building block for the synthesis of many molecules of industrial interest. It is used for the production of agrochemicals, cosmetic ingredients, polymers, and pharmaceuticals, as well as for flavors and fragrance products. Different routes for the chemical synthesis of glyoxylic acid have been developed ( 29 , 34 ). Besides the formation of by-products, all these chemical approaches share the major drawback of low yields. Industrial biotechnology using biocatalytic-based approaches provides an interesting alternative to overcome these difficulties. Examples for the enzymatic production of glyoxylic acid are the conversion of glycolic acid by glycolic acid oxidase from spinach, selectively yielding as much as 98% glyoxylic acid in a whole-cell system. Further, a two-step chemoenzymatic route using base catalysis and glycolic acid oxidase for the synthesis of glyoxylic acid from glyoxal, as well as the synthesis of glycolic acid by using glycerol oxidase from Aspergillus japonicus , has been described ( 15 , 21 , 39 ).

An attractive alternative to these procedures is combined one-step whole-cell biotransformation using ethylene glycol as a readily available and economically priced substrate. Various organisms that can utilize ethylene glycol as a sole source of carbon and energy under oxic as well as anoxic conditions have been described ( 13 , 14 ). Metabolic sequential oxidation of ethylene glycol into glyoxylic acid via the intermediate glycolic acid has been shown in a variety of different bacterial species ( 8 , 11 , 17 , 23 ). These reactions can be catalyzed either by dehydrogenases, by oxidases, or by a combination of these enzymes ( 6 , 21 , 22 ). Among the alcohol dehydrogenases (ADHs), the pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ)-dependent enzymes are of specific interest, since some of these enzymes are known to be involved in the oxidation of various short-chain alcohols ( 2 , 12 ). One of the best-studied of these enzymes is Pseudomonas aeruginosa ExaA (formerly QedH), which is a homologue of Pseudomonas putida U PedE and PedH ( 3 ). This periplasmic enzyme has been found to be essential for growth utilizing ethanol as a carbon source, since it catalyzes the initial oxidation of the substrate into acetaldehyde ( 18 ).

ExaA has recently been reported to accept a broad spectrum of substrates in addition to ethanol, including primary and secondary alcohols, as well as diols such as 1,3-propanediol ( 9 ). From these results, together with the fact that a broad substrate spectrum represents a common feature of alcohol dehydrogenases, one could speculate that ethylene glycol could serve as an alternative substrate for ExaA. Because the absence of an appropriate cofactor regeneration system limits the use of the purified enzyme, the use of a whole-cell system is essential for applications based on this pathway. In this regard, P. aeruginosa is problematic due to its pathogenic potential. In contrast, strains of Pseudomonas putida are generally considered to be model organisms for biotechnological approaches due to their metabolic versatility and low pathogenic potential. Sequence analysis showed that all P. putida strains sequenced so far harbor at least one homologue of the exaA gene. Therefore, these strains might serve as good platforms for the establishment of a fermentative route from ethylene glycol to glyoxylic acid.

To test this hypothesis, we investigated, characterized, and compared the metabolisms of ethylene glycol in the two P. putida strains KT2440 and JM37. This was conducted via growth and bioconversion experiments, as well as directed mutagenesis and proteome analysis.

DISCUSSION

The ability to grow with ethylene glycol as a sole source of carbon and energy has been demonstrated for various kinds of microorganisms, some of which initially oxidize it to glyoxylic acid via glycolic acid ( 11 , 13 ). In this work, we investigated the potential of the Pseudomonas putida strains KT2440 and JM37 for the microbial oxidation of ethylene glycol into the more valuable product glyoxylic acid. In contrast to strain KT2440, strain JM37 showed rapid growth with ethylene glycol, glycolic acid, or glyoxylic acid as the sole source of carbon and energy. The observation of a longer initial lag phase for strain JM37 during growth on ethylene glycol suggests the induction of additional enzymes, such as dehydrogenases and oxidases, which are reported to be important for the first steps of ethylene glycol metabolism via glyoxylic acid ( 6 , 8 ). Despite the differences in growth, resting-cell suspension experiments revealed complete conversion of ethylene glycol, glycolic acid, and glyoxylic acid for P. putida KT2440 and JM37, albeit with substantial differences in the time needed for complete conversion. While strain JM37 accumulated no potential metabolic intermediates during the conversion of ethylene glycol, glycolic acid and glyoxylic acid were found in supernatants of strain KT2440. This clearly indicates the roles of glycolic acid and glyoxylic acid as intermediates in the metabolism of ethylene glycol in strain KT2440. Previous studies had demonstrated glycolaldehyde to be a product of ethylene glycol oxidation ( 6 , 22 ). Surprisingly, this first expected intermediate in a three-step oxidation of ethylene glycol to glyoxylic acid was not found to accumulate in our experiments. A possible explanation for this observation could be that the formation of glycolic acid from ethylene glycol is actually catalyzed in two consecutive steps by the same enzyme. Alternatively, free glycolaldehyde might not be detected due to the formation of Schiff base adducts with amino groups of nearby proteins ( 1 ). In both cases, the expected glycolaldehyde concentrations would be very low and thus could be below the detection limit of our system.

Even though further experiments are needed to prove this hypothesis, we propose that strain KT2440 actually metabolizes ethylene glycol via glycolaldehyde to glycolic acid and glyoxylic acid ( Fig. 4 ). Subsequently, some of the glyoxylic acid is oxidized to oxalic acid, whereas about three-quarters of the substrate could not be found in any of the products identified.

From our differential proteomics approach, increased expression levels of tartronate semialdehyde synthase (Gcl), malate synthase (GlcB), and isocitrate lyase (AceA) were found in strain JM37 after treatment with ethylene glycol or glyoxylic acid. In these experiments, isocitrate lyase showed the smallest fold change after treatment with ethylene glycol and was not significantly upregulated after treatment with glyoxylic acid. This suggests that the “glycerate pathway” and the “malate pathway” play key roles in glyoxylic acid conversion in JM37. It has been reported that the pathway initiated by Gcl enables growth on glyoxylic acid, while the pathways using GlcB and AceA can lead only to the production of energy ( Fig. 4 ) ( 4 , 24 , 26 ). In a recent study, Li and coworkers tried to prevent the metabolism of glyoxylic acid in strain JM37 by disrupting all the degradation pathways mentioned above. However, no single mutations of aceA , glcB , or glc , and none of the corresponding double mutations, had any effect on glyoxylic acid degradation ( 28 ). The authors suggested that an additional degradation pathway might exist, since a number of such alternative pathways have been described for different microorganisms ( 5 , 25 , 38 ). Despite the possibility of such an alternative in JM37, our proteome analysis showed no induction of enzymes that could be related to one of these pathways. Since we cannot rule out the possibility that alternative metabolic pathways could be constitutively expressed, this issue needs further investigations, which are under way in our laboratory.

Interestingly, in strain KT2440, AceA, but not Gcl (PP_4297) or GlcB (PP_0356), was upregulated after treatment with ethylene glycol or glyoxylic acid. On the one hand, the absence of Gcl induction might explain the lack of growth with ethylene glycol, glycolic acid, or glyoxylic acid found for strain KT2440. On the other hand, the induction of AceA suggests that this enzyme is active under the conditions used. This enzyme catalyzes the first step of the glyoxylate shunt for the generation of energy but does not support cell mass generation. Together with the absence of detectable growth, the activity of AceA could therefore be the explanation for the carbon imbalance observed in all bioconversion experiments. This is further supported by the observation that conversions with the deletion mutant GN259 resulted in an improved carbon balance compared to that in strain KT2440. In addition, strain GN259 accumulated the intermediates glycolic acid and glyoxylic acid over the entire time course of the experiment. This underlines the importance of at least one of these pathways for ethylene glycol metabolism via the central intermediate glyoxylic acid in strain KT2440. At present, we cannot rule out the possibility that more than one pathway might be active or become active during incubation. However, our data clearly support the hypothesis that the degradation of ethylene glycol leads to the formation of oxalic acid and the production of energy from glyoxylic acid via the glyoxylate shunt.

In addition to the upregulation of proteins involved in the degradation of glyoxylic acid, our proteome analysis of ethylene glycol-induced cells of KT2440 and JM37 revealed the upregulation of the two PQQ-dependent ADHs PedE and PedH, as well as that of the NADH-dependent ALDHs PedI and PP_0545. As indicated by the name, the quinoprotein alcohol dehydrogenases PedE and PedH harbor the cofactor pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ) as a prosthetic group. These periplasmic enzymes have been shown to play a crucial role in the degradation of primary alcohols ( 32 , 36 ) and have been reported to be induced by their corresponding substrates. The best-studied example of a PQQ-dependent ADH is ExaA, an ethanol dehydrogenase from P. aeruginosa ( 33 ). In this organism, ExaA has been found to catalyze the initial oxidation of ethanol to acetaldehyde, thus enabling growth on ethanol ( 36 ). In P. aeruginosa , the transcriptional regulator ErbR (formerly known as AgmR) controls the expression of ExaB (cytochrome c ), ExaC (aldehyde dehydrogenase), and the operon for PQQ biosynthesis ( pqqABCDEH ) directly, whereas ExaA expression is regulated indirectly via the sensor kinase/response regulator pair EraS/EraR (formerly ExaD/ExaE) ( 16 ). Upstream of ErbR, the two histidine kinases ErcS and ErcS′, as well as the response regulator ErdR, have been identified as additional regulatory elements ( 30 ).

Our results indicate that the oxidation of ethylene glycol in KT2440 could be controlled by such an ErbR-type regulon. This hypothesis is supported by several lines of evidence: (i) induction of ErbR and ErcS′ homologues (PedR1, PedS1), (ii) induction of several enzyme homologues known to be regulated by ErbR in P. aeruginosa (e.g., PedE, PedI), and (iii) similarities in the corresponding genetic contexts of P. putida KT2440, P. aeruginosa , and P. putida U ( Fig. 3 ). In addition, we found strongly reduced PedE expression and no induction of PedI in the P. putida aceA deletion strain GN259 after treatment with ethylene glycol and no induction compared to strain KT2440. This observation is in agreement with the findings of a recent study demonstrating that the deletion of aceA in P. aeruginosa ATCC 17933 results in downregulation of all genes necessary for ethanol oxidation, including ExaA ( 27 ). Deletion of the ErbR homologue PedR1 and subsequent characterization of the PedE and PedH induction pattern in the presence of ethylene glycol could finally prove this hypothesis; experiments for this purpose are currently in progress. Despite similarities between the ErbR-like regulon in P. aeruginosa and the putative homologue in different P. putida strains, some major differences exist. One such difference is the presence of two quinoproteins in P. putida strains (e.g., PedE and PedH), compared to only one in P. aeruginosa . Arias and coworkers have shown that PedE and PedH from strain P. putida U are involved in the conversion of phenylethanol and alcohols with a chain length of C 6 to C 9 ( 3 ). However, only a double mutant strain defective in both PQQ-dependent enzymes was unable to grow with the substrates mentioned above. Interestingly, growth with alcohols with chain lengths shorter than C 6 was not altered for this double mutant, indicating the specificity and redundancy of this system. In analogy to this, our bioconversion experiments revealed that either PedE or PedH from P. putida strain KT2440 can catalyze the conversion of ethylene glycol in this organism. This can be concluded from the observation that only in the double mutant strain GN127 was the conversion of ethylene glycol significantly affected, whereas the single mutants exhibited rates similar to that of the parental strain. The fact that the conversion rates of glycolic acid and glyoxylic acid were not altered in strain GN127 highlights the importance of PedE and PedH for the first steps of ethylene glycol metabolism. The residual ethylene glycol conversion rate observed in strain GN127 is most likely due to the activity of unspecific dehydrogenases, partly compensating for the activities of the deleted PQQ-dependent ADHs. The absence of glycolic acid and glyoxylic acid accumulation in this mutant can be explained by the rapid oxidation of emerging small amounts of intermediates by subsequent enzymes of the oxidation chain, most likely the two ALDHs PedI and PP_0545.

In summary, we were able to reconstruct novel pathways for ethylene glycol metabolism in the Pseudomonas putida strains KT2440 and JM37 ( Fig. 4 ). In KT2440, this pathway is initiated by the PQQ-dependent ADHs PedE and PedH and the ALDHs PedI and PP_0545 producing glyoxylic acid via the intermediates glycolaldehyde and glycolic acid. Subsequently, glyoxylic acid either is further oxidized to the “dead-end” product oxalic acid or is metabolized via AceA, leading to the generation of energy. In strain JM37, the activity of two additional pathways, namely, Gcl and GlcB, leads to rapid metabolism of ethylene glycol without accumulation of the corresponding intermediates or oxalic acid. The elimination of key enzymes for glyoxylic acid metabolism in strain KT2440 resulted in an improved carbon balance, most likely due to the deletion of aceA and the accumulation of glyoxylic acid over the entire experimental time course. From these results, we propose that P. putida KT2440 is a promising candidate for further metabolic engineering approaches to the establishment of a biocatalytic route for the production of glyoxylic acid from ethylene glycol.
