---
pmid: '15780933'
title: Structural bases of unphosphorylated STAT1 association and receptor binding.
authors:
- Mao X
- Ren Z
- Parker GN
- Sondermann H
- Pastorello MA
- Wang W
- McMurray JS
- Demeler B
- Darnell JE Jr
- Chen X
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.02.021
---

# Structural bases of unphosphorylated STAT1 association and receptor binding.
**Authors:** Mao X, Ren Z, Parker GN, Sondermann H, Pastorello MA, Wang W, McMurray JS, Demeler B, Darnell JE Jr, Chen X
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2005.02.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2005.02.021)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2005 Mar 18;17(6):761-71. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.02.021.

Structural bases of unphosphorylated STAT1 association and receptor binding.

Mao X(1), Ren Z, Parker GN, Sondermann H, Pastorello MA, Wang W, McMurray JS, 
Demeler B, Darnell JE Jr, Chen X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center 
, The University of Texas, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The crystal structure has been determined at 3.0 A resolution for an 
unphosphorylated STAT1 (1-683) complexed with a phosphopeptide derived from the 
alpha chain of interferon gamma (IFNgamma) receptor. Two dimer interfaces are 
seen, one between the N domains (NDs) (amino acid residues 1-123) and the other 
between the core fragments (CFs) (residues 132-683). Analyses of the wild-type 
(wt) and mutant STAT1 proteins by static light scattering, analytical 
ultracentrifugation, and coimmunoprecipitation suggest that STAT1 is 
predominantly dimeric prior to activation, and the dimer is mediated by the ND 
interactions. The connecting region between the ND and the CF is flexible and 
allows two interconvertable orientations of the CFs, termed "antiparallel" or 
"parallel," as determined by SH2 domain orientations. Functional implications of 
these dimer conformations are discussed. Also revealed in this structure is the 
detailed interaction between STAT1 SH2 domain and its docking site on IFNgamma 
receptor.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.02.021
PMID: 15780933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
