---
pmid: '18212064'
title: Chromatin-bound p53 anchors activated Smads and the mSin3A corepressor to confer
  transforming-growth-factor-beta-mediated transcription repression.
authors:
- Wilkinson DS
- Tsai WW
- Schumacher MA
- Barton MC
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2268392
doi: 10.1128/MCB.01442-07
---

# Chromatin-bound p53 anchors activated Smads and the mSin3A corepressor to confer transforming-growth-factor-beta-mediated transcription repression.
**Authors:** Wilkinson DS, Tsai WW, Schumacher MA, Barton MC
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.01442-07](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.01442-07)
**PMC:** [PMC2268392](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2268392/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Mar;28(6):1988-98. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01442-07. Epub 2008
Jan  22.

Chromatin-bound p53 anchors activated Smads and the mSin3A corepressor to confer 
transforming-growth-factor-beta-mediated transcription repression.

Wilkinson DS(1), Tsai WW, Schumacher MA, Barton MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Unit 1000, University of 
Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030, USA.

In hepatic cells, Smad and SnoN proteins converge with p53 to repress 
transcription of AFP, an oncodevelopmental tumor marker aberrantly reactivated 
in hepatoma cells. Using p53- and SnoN-depleted hepatoma cell clones, we define 
a mechanism for repression mediated by this novel transcriptional partnership. 
We find that p53 anchors activated Smads and the corepressor mSin3A to the AFP 
distal promoter. Sequential chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses and molecular 
modeling indicate that p53 and Smad proteins simultaneously occupy overlapping 
p53 and Smad regulatory elements to establish repression of AFP transcription. 
In addition to its well-known function in antagonizing transforming growth 
factor beta (TGF-beta) responses, we find that SnoN actively participates in AFP 
repression by positively regulating mSin3A protein levels. We propose that 
activation of TGF-beta signaling restores a dynamic interplay between p53 and 
TGF-beta effectors that cooperate to effectively target mSin3A to tumor marker 
AFP and reestablish transcription repression.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.01442-07
PMCID: PMC2268392
PMID: 18212064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In hepatic cells, Smad and SnoN proteins converge with p53 to repress transcription of AFP , an oncodevelopmental tumor marker aberrantly reactivated in hepatoma cells. Using p53- and SnoN-depleted hepatoma cell clones, we define a mechanism for repression mediated by this novel transcriptional partnership. We find that p53 anchors activated Smads and the corepressor mSin3A to the AFP distal promoter. Sequential chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses and molecular modeling indicate that p53 and Smad proteins simultaneously occupy overlapping p53 and Smad regulatory elements to establish repression of AFP transcription. In addition to its well-known function in antagonizing transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) responses, we find that SnoN actively participates in AFP repression by positively regulating mSin3A protein levels. We propose that activation of TGF-β signaling restores a dynamic interplay between p53 and TGF-β effectors that cooperate to effectively target mSin3A to tumor marker AFP and reestablish transcription repression.
