---
pmid: '27021683'
title: MiR-140-5p regulates hypoxia-mediated human pulmonary artery smooth muscle
  cell proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation by targeting Dnmt1 and promoting
  SOD2 expression.
authors:
- Zhang Y
- Xu J
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.03.116
---

# MiR-140-5p regulates hypoxia-mediated human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cell proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation by targeting Dnmt1 and promoting SOD2 expression.
**Authors:** Zhang Y, Xu J
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.03.116](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.03.116)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Apr 22;473(1):342-348. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.03.116. Epub 2016 Mar 26.

MiR-140-5p regulates hypoxia-mediated human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cell 
proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation by targeting Dnmt1 and promoting 
SOD2 expression.

Zhang Y(1), Xu J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, PR China.
(2)Department of Cardiac Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, PR China. Electronic address: xujingdoc@163.com.

miR-140-5p is down-regulated in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension 
(PAH) and experimental models of PAH, and inhibits hypoxia-mediated pulmonary 
artery smooth muscle cell (PASMC) proliferation in vitro. Delivery of synthetic 
miR-140-5p prevents and treats established, experimental PAH. DNA 
methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1) is up-regulated in PAH associated human PASMCs 
(HPASMCs), which promotes the development of PAH by hypermethylation of CpG 
islands within the promoter for superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2) and 
down-regulating SOD2 expression. We searched for miR-140-5p targets using 
TargetScan, PicTar and MiRanda tools, and found that Dnmt1 is a potential target 
of miR-140-5p. Based on these findings, we speculated that miR-140-5p might 
target Dnmt1 and regulate SOD2 expression to regulate hypoxia-mediated HPASMC 
proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation. We detected the expression of 
miR-140-5p, Dnmt1 and SOD2 by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction 
(qRT-PCR) and western blot assays, respectively, and found down-regulation of 
miR-140-5p and SOD2 and up-regulation of Dnmt1 exist in PAH tissues and 
hypoxia-mediated HPASMCs. Cell proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation 
detection showed that miR-140-5p inhibits proliferation and promotes apoptosis 
and differentiation of HPASMCs in hypoxia, while the effect of Dnmt1 on 
hypoxia-mediated HPASMCs is reversed. Luciferase assay confirmed that miR-140-5p 
targets Dnmt1 directly. An inverse correlation is also found between miR-140-5p 
and Dnmt1 in HPASMCs. In addition, we further investigated whether miR-140-5p 
and Dnmt1 regulate HPASMC proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation by 
regulating SOD2 expression, and the results confirmed our speculation. Taken 
together, these results indicated that miR-140-5p at least partly targets Dnmt1 
and regulates SOD2 expression to inhibit proliferation and promote apoptosis and 
differentiation of HPASMCs in hypoxia.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.03.116
PMID: 27021683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
