---
pmid: '1756986'
title: Cloning and expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae of the NAD(P)H-dependent
  xylose reductase-encoding gene (XYL1) from the xylose-assimilating yeast Pichia
  stipitis.
authors:
- Amore R
- Kötter P
- Küster C
- Ciriacy M
- Hollenberg CP
journal: Gene
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0378-1119(91)90592-y
---

# Cloning and expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae of the NAD(P)H-dependent xylose reductase-encoding gene (XYL1) from the xylose-assimilating yeast Pichia stipitis.
**Authors:** Amore R, Kötter P, Küster C, Ciriacy M, Hollenberg CP
**Journal:** Gene (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0378-1119(91)90592-y](https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-1119(91)90592-y)

## Abstract

1. Gene. 1991 Dec 20;109(1):89-97. doi: 10.1016/0378-1119(91)90592-y.

Cloning and expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae of the NAD(P)H-dependent 
xylose reductase-encoding gene (XYL1) from the xylose-assimilating yeast Pichia 
stipitis.

Amore R(1), Kötter P, Küster C, Ciriacy M, Hollenberg CP.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, F.R.G.

The XYL1 gene of the yeast Pichia stipitis has been isolated from a genomic 
library using a specific cDNA probe, and its nucleotide (nt) sequence has been 
determined. In the 5' noncoding region of the P. stipitis XYL1 gene a TATAAA 
element (known to be necessary for transcription initiation in most yeast genes) 
is found at nt -81, and two CCAAT recognition motifs (often referred to as the 
CCAAT box) are present at nt -146 and -106. The XYL1 encodes a polypeptide of 
35,927 Da that constitutes a NADH/NADPH-dependent xylose reductase (XR). The 
enzyme is part of the xylose-xylulose pathway that is absent or only weakly 
expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Extensive homology is found to the N 
terminus of the XR of Pachysolen tannophilus and Candida shehatae. None of the 
known cofactor binding domains found in many NAD-dependent dehydrogenases are 
present in the protein. Transformants of S. cerevisiae containing XYL1 of P. 
stipitis synthesize an active XR. Fusion of XYL1 with the prokaryotic tac 
promoter leads to a gene that can be expressed in S. cerevisiae and Escherichia 
coli.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(91)90592-y
PMID: 1756986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
