---
pmid: '30778222'
title: Distinct functions of ATG16L1 isoforms in membrane binding and LC3B lipidation
  in autophagy-related processes.
authors:
- Lystad AH
- Carlsson SR
- de la Ballina LR
- Kauffman KJ
- Nag S
- Yoshimori T
- Melia TJ
- Simonsen A
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2019'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC7032593
doi: 10.1038/s41556-019-0274-9
---

# Distinct functions of ATG16L1 isoforms in membrane binding and LC3B lipidation in autophagy-related processes.
**Authors:** Lystad AH, Carlsson SR, de la Ballina LR, Kauffman KJ, Nag S, Yoshimori T, Melia TJ, Simonsen A
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41556-019-0274-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-019-0274-9)
**PMC:** [PMC7032593](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7032593/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2019 Mar;21(3):372-383. doi: 10.1038/s41556-019-0274-9. Epub
2019  Feb 18.

Distinct functions of ATG16L1 isoforms in membrane binding and LC3B lipidation 
in autophagy-related processes.

Lystad AH(1)(2), Carlsson SR(3), de la Ballina LR(4)(5), Kauffman KJ(6), Nag 
S(6), Yoshimori T(7), Melia TJ(6), Simonsen A(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. 
a.h.lystad@medisin.uio.no.
(2)Centre for Cancer Cell Reprogramming, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty 
of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. a.h.lystad@medisin.uio.no.
(3)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Umeå, Umeå, 
Sweden. sven.carlsson@umu.se.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Centre for Cancer Cell Reprogramming, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty 
of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(6)Department of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
CT, USA.
(7)Department of Genetics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, 
Japan.
(8)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. 
anne.simonsen@medisin.uio.no.
(9)Centre for Cancer Cell Reprogramming, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty 
of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. anne.simonsen@medisin.uio.no.

Covalent modification of LC3 and GABARAP proteins to phosphatidylethanolamine in 
the double-membrane phagophore is a key event in the early phase of 
macroautophagy, but can also occur on single-membrane structures. In both cases 
this involves transfer of LC3/GABARAP from ATG3 to phosphatidylethanolamine at 
the target membrane. Here we have purified the full-length human ATG12-5-ATG16L1 
complex and show its essential role in LC3B/GABARAP lipidation in vitro. We have 
identified two functionally distinct membrane-binding regions in ATG16L1. An 
N-terminal membrane-binding amphipathic helix is required for LC3B lipidation 
under all conditions tested. By contrast, the C-terminal membrane-binding region 
is dispensable for canonical autophagy but essential for VPS34-independent LC3B 
lipidation at perturbed endosomes. We further show that the ATG16L1 C-terminus 
can compensate for WIPI2 depletion to sustain lipidation during starvation. This 
C-terminal membrane-binding region is present only in the β-isoform of ATG16L1, 
showing that ATG16L1 isoforms mechanistically distinguish between different LC3B 
lipidation mechanisms under different cellular conditions.

DOI: 10.1038/s41556-019-0274-9
PMCID: PMC7032593
PMID: 30778222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors have no 
conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Covalent modification of LC3 and GABARAP proteins to phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) in the double-membrane phagophore is a key event in the early phase of macroautophagy, but can also occur on single membrane structures. In both cases this involves transfer of LC3/GABARAP from ATG3 to PE at the target membrane. Here we have purified the full-length human ATG12–5–16L1 complex and show its essential role in LC3B/GABARAP lipidation in vitro . We have identified two functionally distinct membrane-binding regions in ATG16L1. An N-terminal membrane-binding amphipathic helix is required for LC3B lipidation under all conditions tested. In contrast, the C-terminal membrane-binding region is dispensable for canonical autophagy, but essential for VPS34-independent LC3B-lipidation at perturbed endosomes. We further show that the ATG16L1 C-terminus can compensate for WIPI2 depletion to sustain lipidation during starvation. Remarkably, the C-terminal membrane-binding region comprises the β-isoform-specific sequence of ATG16L1, showing that ATG16L1 isoforms mechanistically distinguish LC3B-lipidation under different cellular conditions.

Introduction

Macroautophagy (hereafter autophagy) involves sequestration of intracellular constituents into double membrane autophagosomes that fuse with lysosomes to allow cargo degradation. The LC3 and GABARAP subfamilies comprise ubiquitin-like proteins that become covalently attached to phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) in the autophagosomal membrane 1 where they function in autophagosome biogenesis, recruitment of cargo and fusion with the lysosome. Recently, it has become evident that LC3 also can be conjugated to single-layer endomembrane structures in response to cellular stress as infection or vesicle damage 2 .

Prior to lipidation, LC3/GABARAPs are cleaved by ATG4 to expose a C-terminal glycine, which becomes adenylated and conjugated to a catalytic cysteine on the E1-like ATG7 3 – 5 and then transferred onto a cysteine residue of the E2-like ATG3. The final transfer to PE requires the E3-like ATG12-5–16L1 complex 6 . It is proposed that ATG12-5–16L1 targets ATG3 to the site of lipidation through an interaction between ATG3 and ATG12 7 and membrane targeting by ATG16L1 8 , but the exact function of the ATG12-5–16L1 complex is poorly described. During amino acid or glucose starvation, membrane recruitment of ATG16L1 involves its binding to WIPI2b 11 , an effector protein of phosphatidyl 3-phosphate (PI(3)P) or PI(5)P 12 , 13 . However, ATG16L1 targeting to membranes may be independent of WIPI2b during endomembrane LC3 lipidation 14 – 16 .

Here we demonstrate that ATG16L1 is able to bind directly to membranes through separate N-terminal and C-terminal membrane-binding regions. Using a purified human full-length ATG12-5–16L1 complex, we show that both membrane interaction regions are required for efficient lipidation of LC3 in vitro . Interestingly, while the N-terminal membrane-binding region is essential for LC3B lipidation under all conditions tested in vivo , the β-isoform-specific C-terminal region is required for VPS34-independent LC3-lipidation on perturbed endosomes, but dispensable for canonical autophagy. We propose that distinct membrane-binding by ATG16L1 isoforms mechanistically distinguish LC3-lipidation on different intracellular membrane compartments.

Discussion

In this study we have identified two membrane-binding regions in ATG16L1 with distinct functions in lipidation of LC3B and GABARAP proteins. Our data show that an N-terminal membrane-binding amphipathic helix (helix2) in ATG16L1 is important for LC3B or GABARAP lipidation under all conditions tested in vitro and in vivo , including non-selective and selective types of autophagy, as well as LAP and endosome perturbation. In contrast, the C-terminal β isoform-specific membrane-binding region is dispensable for canonical autophagy, but is required for ATG16L1 membrane recruitment and LC3B lipidation on perturbed endosomes in cells treated with monensin and the VPS34 inhibitor VPS34IN1 ( Fig. 7i ). Thus, we propose that distinct membrane binding by the two isoforms of ATG16L1 mechanistically distinguish lipidation of LC3 and GABARAP proteins at distinct cellular locations and/or under different cellular conditions.

The transfer of LC3 and GABARAP proteins from ATG7 via ATG3 to PE in the membrane necessitates close contact between the components and accessibility to the lipid head groups. Using a purified full length human ATG12-5–16L1 complex for in vitro lipidation assays, we show that ATG12–16L1 is essential for ATG3 function. In line with previous findings 10 , the N-terminal amphipathic helix of ATG3 is also required for efficient in vitro LC3B lipidation. Although ATG16L1 helix2 enables membrane binding, it is not required for targeting and localization of the ATG12-5–16L1 complex to WIPI2b positive structures. We therefore propose that the main function of ATG16L1 helix2 is to provide close proximity contact of the complex and ATG3 with the membrane, promoting membrane insertion of ATG3’s amphipathic helix and subsequent lipidation of LC3B/GABARAP proteins. It is also possible that helix embedment in the outer layer of a bilayer membrane produces local membrane distortions 26 , thus promoting binding of the ATG3 amphipathic helix. It was recently reported that incubation of yeast Atg12–5–16 with giant liposomes caused Atg16-dependent deformations of the membrane 25 , suggesting that yeast Atg16 may contain a similar amphipathic helix. It has also been reported that Atg5 may facilitate membrane binding of the Atg12–5–16 complex in yeast 27 . Interestingly, while Atg12–5 was unable to bind membrane, membrane binding was regained in the presence of Atg16, suggesting that Atg16 also contributes to membrane binding in yeast.

The C-terminal β-isoform-specific membrane-binding region of ATG16L1 was not required for starvation-induced LC3B/GABARAP-lipidation. This is in line with earlier studies showing that the C-terminus of ATG16L1 is dispensable for starvation-induced autophagy 19 and consistent with the fact that yeast Atg16 lacks the C-terminal domains of human ATG16L1 28 . Intriguingly, we found that the ability of the N-terminal ATG16L1 (aa 1–249) protein to mediate LC3B/GABARAP lipidation was dependent of the presence of WIPI2 and that the C-terminal part of ATG16L1 could support autophagic flux in the absence of WIPI2. Moreover, the inability of the C-terminal membrane binding mutant to mediate in vitro LC3B lipidation onto low-curvature liposomes was rescued by adding PI(3)P and WIPI2b to the reaction, indicating that ATG16L1 C-terminal membrane binding is redundant with WIPI2b in targeting the ATG12-5–16L1 complex to membranes. In support of such a model, we show that the ATG16L1 β isoform-specific membrane-binding sequence is required for LC3-lipidation onto endosomal membranes after their perturbation by lysosomotrophic agents or ionophores, in an ULK1/2 and VPS34-independent process, known to also require the WD40 domain of ATG16L1 15 . The mechanisms involved in targeting of the ATG12-5–16L1 complex to damaged endosomes is not clear, but likely involves both C-terminal membrane binding and protein interactions ( Fig. 7i ). While both WIPI2b and FIP200 are reported to recruit the ATG12-5–16L1 complex to sites of autophagosome formation during starvation-induced autophagy 11 , 29 , 30 other proteins may facilitate ATG12-5–16L1 complex targeting to perturbed endosomes, as the endosomal membrane proteins TMEM59 and TMEM166/EVA1, found to interact with the WD-repeat domain in ATG16L1 31 , 32 . Moreover, ubiquitin binds to the WD-repeat domain of ATG16L1 to enhance the autophagic response to leaky endosomes during bacterial infection 33 . The C-terminus of ATG16L1 has likely evolved to permit additional functions in metazoans, such as defense against invading pathogens and LC3-decoration of non-autophagic low-curvature membranes, whereas LC3 lipidation on the phagophore is more promiscuous in this sense because the curvature and lipid composition is different. A third isoform of ATG16L1 expressed in mouse brain has been described (the γ-isoform) 34 and possesses an even longer sequence (35 aa) at the site of the β-specific sequence, but its role in human is uncertain and it was not included in our study.

Interestingly, the C-terminal membrane binding region surrounds the Crohńs disease related mutation T300A and the Caspase 3 cleavage site (amino acids 296–299) 35 . Whether membrane binding somehow regulates accessibility of the caspase cleavage site remains to be investigated, but the region encompassing the C-terminal membrane binding domain is clearly a hub for regulation as it is the most heavily phosphorylated region in ATG16L1 (PhosphoSitePlus, https://www.phosphosite.org/ ).

In conclusion, we here identify two membrane-binding regions in ATG16L1 and unravel distinct functions of the α and β isoforms of ATG16L1 in LC3B lipidation. Our findings pave the way for a better understanding of the physiological functions of the two ATG16L1 isoforms and provide mechanistic insight into their role in canonical autophagy and other applications utilizing LC3/GABARAP lipidation.
