---
pmid: '29426014'
title: Network Analysis of UBE3A/E6AP-Associated Proteins Provides Connections to
  Several Distinct Cellular Processes.
authors:
- Martínez-Noël G
- Luck K
- Kühnle S
- Desbuleux A
- Szajner P
- Galligan JT
- Rodriguez D
- Zheng L
- Boyland K
- Leclere F
- Zhong Q
- Hill DE
- Vidal M
- Howley PM
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2018'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC5866790
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2018.01.021
---

# Network Analysis of UBE3A/E6AP-Associated Proteins Provides Connections to Several Distinct Cellular Processes.
**Authors:** Martínez-Noël G, Luck K, Kühnle S, Desbuleux A, Szajner P, Galligan JT, Rodriguez D, Zheng L, Boyland K, Leclere F, Zhong Q, Hill DE, Vidal M, Howley PM
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2018.01.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2018.01.021)
**PMC:** [PMC5866790](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5866790/)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2018 Mar 30;430(7):1024-1050. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2018.01.021. Epub
 2018 Feb 6.

Network Analysis of UBE3A/E6AP-Associated Proteins Provides Connections to 
Several Distinct Cellular Processes.

Martínez-Noël G(1), Luck K(2), Kühnle S(1), Desbuleux A(3), Szajner P(1), 
Galligan JT(1), Rodriguez D(1), Zheng L(1), Boyland K(1), Leclere F(1), Zhong 
Q(2), Hill DE(2), Vidal M(4), Howley PM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA.
(2)Center for Cancer Systems Biology (CCSB), Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA; Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Center for Cancer Systems Biology (CCSB), Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA; Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA; GIGA-R, University of Liège, Liège 4000, Belgium.
(4)Center for Cancer Systems Biology (CCSB), Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: peter_howley@hms.harvard.edu.

Perturbations in activity and dosage of the UBE3A ubiquitin-ligase have been 
linked to Angelman syndrome and autism spectrum disorders. UBE3A was initially 
identified as the cellular protein hijacked by the human papillomavirus E6 
protein to mediate the ubiquitylation of p53, a function critical to the 
oncogenic potential of these viruses. Although a number of substrates have been 
identified, the normal cellular functions and pathways affected by UBE3A are 
largely unknown. Previously, we showed that UBE3A associates with HERC2, NEURL4, 
and MAPK6/ERK3 in a high-molecular-weight complex of unknown function that we 
refer to as the HUN complex (HERC2, UBE3A, and NEURL4). In this study, the 
combination of two complementary proteomic approaches with a rigorous network 
analysis revealed cellular functions and pathways in which UBE3A and the HUN 
complex are involved. In addition to finding new UBE3A-associated proteins, such 
as MCM6, SUGT1, EIF3C, and ASPP2, network analysis revealed that 
UBE3A-associated proteins are connected to several fundamental cellular 
processes including translation, DNA replication, intracellular trafficking, and 
centrosome regulation. Our analysis suggests that UBE3A could be involved in the 
control and/or integration of these cellular processes, in some cases as a 
component of the HUN complex, and also provides evidence for crosstalk between 
the HUN complex and CAMKII interaction networks. This study contributes to a 
deeper understanding of the cellular functions of UBE3A and its potential role 
in pathways that may be affected in Angelman syndrome, UBE3A-associated autism 
spectrum disorders, and human papillomavirus-associated cancers.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2018.01.021
PMCID: PMC5866790
PMID: 29426014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Perturbations in activity and dosage of the UBE3A ubiquitin-ligase have been linked to Angelman Syndrome and autism spectrum disorders. UBE3A was initially identified as the cellular protein hijacked by the human papillomavirus E6 protein to mediate the ubiquitylation of p53, a function critical to the oncogenic potential of these viruses. Although a number of substrates have been identified, the normal cellular functions and pathways affected by UBE3A are largely unknown. Previously we showed that UBE3A associates with HERC2, NEURL4, and MAPK6/ERK3 in a high molecular weight complex of unknown function that we refer to as the HUN complex ( H ERC2, U BE3A, and N EURL4). In this study, the combination of two complementary proteomic approaches with a rigorous network analysis revealed cellular functions and pathways in which UBE3A and the HUN complex are involved. In addition to finding new UBE3A-associated proteins, such as MCM6, SUGT1, EIF3C, and ASPP2, network analysis revealed that UBE3A associated proteins are connected to several fundamental cellular processes including translation, DNA replication, intracellular trafficking, and centrosome regulation. Our analysis suggests that UBE3A could be involved in the control and/or integration of these cellular processes, in some cases as a component of the HUN complex, and also provides evidence for crosstalk between the HUN complex and CAMKII interaction networks. This study contributes to a deeper understanding of the cellular functions of UBE3A and its potential role in pathways that may be affected in Angelman Syndrome, UBE3A-associated autism spectrum disorders and HPV-associated cancers.

Introduction

The ubiquitin-ligase UBE3A, also known as E6AP (for E6-associated protein) was originally discovered as the cellular protein that is hijacked by the high risk human papillomavirus (hrHPVs) E6 proteins to target the ubiquitylation and proteolysis of the tumor suppressor p53 [ 1 – 4 ]. UBE3A is a 100-kDa protein encoded by a gene located on chromosome 15q11-q13. Three different isoforms of UBE3A generated by differential splicing differ in their amino-terminal sequences, although it is not yet known whether or how they might differ in function [ 5 ]. UBE3A is ubiquitously expressed from both the paternal and maternal alleles but as a consequence of imprinting, only the maternal UBE3A allele is expressed in certain areas of the brain [ 6 , 7 ].

Defects in UBE3A expression and/or activity are associated with several pathologic disorders. The E6-induced degradation of p53 is a hallmark of hrHPV oncogenicity in HPV-associated cancers. In addition, UBE3A is linked to two different neurological disorders. Increased gene dosage of UBE3A is implicated in some forms of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) [ 8 – 10 ], and the loss of function of UBE3A in the central nervous system is the cause of Angelman syndrome (AS), a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by severe mental retardation, ataxia, loss of speech, seizures, and other abnormalities [ 11 – 14 ]. Approximately 10% of patients that meet the clinical criteria for AS have no identified UBE3A molecular defect [ 15 ] suggesting that in addition to molecular mechanisms directly affecting UBE3A, perturbations in other genes that share a pathway or work through convergent pathways with UBE3A may also cause AS. Also, the pathways downstream of UBE3A affected in AS are still not well understood. For instance, a mouse model for AS showed decreased CAMKII activity due to increased phosphorylation of CAMKII [ 16 ]. Restoration of CAMKII activity corrected the behavioral deficits observed in this mouse model [ 17 ], yet it is uncertain whether UBE3A and CAMKII might relate to one another.

Despite the fact that UBE3A was discovered over 25 years ago [ 1 ], little is known about its biological functions or the cellular processes in which it is involved. Although efforts to identify substrates for its ubiquitin-ligase activity have provided a list of potential candidates, none have yielded much insight into the actual roles of UBE3A in the cell. Some of the reported UBE3A protein interactors and potential substrates include RAD23A [ 18 ], UBQLN1 and UBQLN2 [ 19 , 20 ], the estrogen receptor [ 21 ], and PSMD4 [ 22 , 23 ]. UBE3A also associates with the proteasome [ 20 , 24 – 28 ] and with the giant ubiquitin-ligase HERC2 [ 28 – 30 ]. Our recent proteomic analysis of UBE3A binding proteins revealed that UBE3A binds to HERC2 in the context of a high molecular weight complex of unknown function [ 28 ] that we will refer to as the HUN ( H ERC2, U BE3A and N EURL4) complex, based on its major components. Another component, the kinase MAPK6/ERK3, is recruited to the HUN complex through its association with NEURL4 [ 28 ]. Impairment of the functions of UBE3A mediated through the HUN complex or defects in other components (e.g. HERC2) of this complex may contribute to the pathological traits observed in AS since a single homozygous mutation in HERC2 segregates in Amish families with a neurodevelopmental disorder with similarities to AS [ 31 , 32 ] and loss of HERC2 function results in a severe neurodevelopmental phenotype [ 33 ].

To gain a better understanding of the pathways and processes in which UBE3A and the HUN complex are involved, we employed two complementary proteomic approaches followed by extensive network analysis of the resulting protein interaction data. First, we performed affinity purifications of HA-tagged bait proteins followed by identification of their associated proteins by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (AP-MS). For this we used two different cell systems: T-REx 293 cells extending our previous studies on UBE3A and HERC2 [ 28 , 30 ] and SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells, which have been successfully used in AS and ASD studies [ 34 – 36 ]. Second, AP-MS experiments were complemented with systematic yeast two hybrid (Y2H) [ 37 ] and yeast three hybrid [ 38 ] screens using UBE3A as bait to specifically identify likely direct interactors of UBE3A and the UBE3A-HPV16 E6 complex respectively.

In this study we identified several new UBE3A-associated or direct interacting proteins, including the minichromosome Maintenance Complex Component 6 (MCM6), Apoptosis-Stimulating Of P53 Protein 2 / Tumor Protein P53 Binding Protein 2 (ASPP2/TP53BP2/P53BP2), the SGT1 Homolog, the MIS12 Kinetochore Complex Assembly Co-chaperone (SUGT1) and the Eukaryotic Translation Initiation Factor 3 Subunit C (EIF3C), as well as two new components of the HUN complex, the Enoyl-CoA Hydratase 1 (ECH1) and the Enoyl-CoA Delta Isomerase 2 (ECI2/PECI). The interactors of UBE3A in SH-SY5Y cells are similar to those previously observed in T-REx 293 cells [ 28 ] indicating that these protein associations are conserved across different cell types. Network analysis of the interaction data suggests that UBE3A and its interaction partners might be involved in the control and integration of several fundamental cellular processes, including translation, intracellular trafficking, and cytoskeleton regulation among others. Importantly the interaction data reveals a possible crosstalk between the HUN and CAMKII protein complexes, providing a potential explanation for the mouse phenotypes mentioned above. Our work should contribute to a better understanding of UBE3A and the pathways and cellular processes perturbed in the diseases and conditions with which it has been associated.

Discussion

A network approach using available systematically generated proteome-scale interaction maps demonstrated the overall coherence of the interaction data obtained in this study, and more specifically identified cellular functions in which UBE3A might have a role. As further discussed below, this systems approach to studying the functions of UBE3A across cell types also provides intriguing insights into its involvement in HPV-associated cancers and the neurodevelopmental disorders AS and ASD.

Pairwise testing to verify primary screen results

FiPPs from primary Y2H screens were then pairwise tested as described in Dreze et al. [ 37 ]. Yeast strains expressing each interacting pair of DB-ORF and AD-ORF were freshly inoculated in SC-Leu and SC-Trp, respectively. Saturated yeast cultures are then mated in quadruplicate in YEPD, followed by a diploid enrichment in SC-Leu-Trp 24 hours later. Diploid yeast cells were spotted in quadruplicate on SC-Leu-Trp-His + 1 mM 3AT and once on SC-Leu-His + 1 mM 3AT + 1 mg/L CHX agar plates. Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) were scored as positive when yeast colonies developed in at least three out of four spots on SC-Leu-Trp-His + 1mM 3AT but did not grow on SC-Leu-His + 1 mM 3AT + 1 mg/L CHX. Colonies were picked and then lysed. The lysates were used as template for duplex PCR amplification using Platinum Taq Polymerase High Fidelity (Life Technologies). For duplex PCR amplification, an indexed AD and DB primers set was used, in which each primer contains a unique barcode. This allowed for the pooling of up to 96 different DB-ORF and 96 different AD-ORF PCR products per well. The barcodes and ORF sequences were then determined using Illumina sequencing by seqWell, Inc. (Beverly, MA) and identified by BLASTing the resulting sequence against the human ORFeome 9.1 [ 175 ].
