---
pmid: '12696671'
title: Genetic interactions provide evidence for the role of integrins in specifying
  normal olfactory behavior in Drosophila melanogaster.
authors:
- Ayyub C
- Paranjape J
journal: J Neurogenet
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1080/01677060215308
---

# Genetic interactions provide evidence for the role of integrins in specifying normal olfactory behavior in Drosophila melanogaster.
**Authors:** Ayyub C, Paranjape J
**Journal:** J Neurogenet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1080/01677060215308](https://doi.org/10.1080/01677060215308)

## Abstract

1. J Neurogenet. 2002 Jul-Sep;16(3):165-74. doi: 10.1080/01677060215308.

Genetic interactions provide evidence for the role of integrins in specifying 
normal olfactory behavior in Drosophila melanogaster.

Ayyub C(1), Paranjape J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, 
Homi Bhabha Road, Mumbai 400 005, India. kali@mailhost.tifr.res.in

In a previous paper, we showed that weak hypomorphic alleles at the myospheroid 
(mys) locus, which encodes the beta-subunit of integrin, possess defects in 
olfactory behavior in both adult and larva. In this paper, we show that another 
olfactory gene, olfE, exhibits haploinsufficient interactions with recessive 
alleles at the mys locus. olfE has recently been shown to be an allele of 
swisscheese and is now designated as sws(olfE). Our findings suggest an 
interaction between the sws protein and beta-integrin in the development and/or 
functioning of the olfactory system. Similar interactions were also observed 
between sws and inflated, a gene encoding the alpha2-subunit of integrin, as 
well as mys and multiple edematous wing (mew), a gene coding for alpha1 subunit 
of integrin. This study provides evidence for the roles of different integrin 
subunits and the sws product in regulating normal olfactory behavior in 
Drosophila.

DOI: 10.1080/01677060215308
PMID: 12696671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
