---
pmid: '11369866'
title: 'Disulfide structure of alfimeprase: a recombinant analog of fibrolase.'
authors:
- Jones G
- Ronk M
- Mori F
- Zhang Z
journal: Protein Sci
year: '2001'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2374009
doi: 10.1110/ps.110101
---

# Disulfide structure of alfimeprase: a recombinant analog of fibrolase.
**Authors:** Jones G, Ronk M, Mori F, Zhang Z
**Journal:** Protein Sci (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1110/ps.110101](https://doi.org/10.1110/ps.110101)
**PMC:** [PMC2374009](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2374009/)

## Abstract

1. Protein Sci. 2001 Jun;10(6):1264-7. doi: 10.1110/ps.110101.

Disulfide structure of alfimeprase: a recombinant analog of fibrolase.

Jones G(1), Ronk M, Mori F, Zhang Z.

Author information:
(1)Analytical Research & Development Department, Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, 
California 91320, USA.

The disulfide structure of alfimeprase, a recombinant analog of fibrolase, was 
experimentally determined by a combination of peptide mapping, Edman 
degradation, and mass spectrometry. The three disulfide bonds were determined to 
be Cys-116/196, Cys-156 /180, and Cys-158/163 with the residue number system of 
alfimeprase.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.110101
PMCID: PMC2374009
PMID: 11369866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The disulfide structure of alfimeprase, a recombinant analog of fibrolase, was experimentally determined by a combination of peptide mapping, Edman degradation, and mass spectrometry. The three disulfide bonds were determined to be Cys-116/196, Cys-156 /180, and Cys-158/163 with the residue number system of alfimeprase.

Results and Discussion

On the basis of the sequence of alfimeprase and the specificities of five commonly used proteases (endoproteinases Asp-N, Glu-C, Lys-C, Arg-C, and trypsin), endoproteinase Asp-N is the only protease that may generate a reasonable number of small peptide fragments. It was found that alfimeprase is very resistant to proteolytic digestion under native conditions. Alfimeprase is a zinc metalloproteinase, and zinc is required to maintain the conformation and protease activity of alfimeprase ( Ahmed et al. 1990 ; Pretzer et al. 1992 ). To make alfimeprase more susceptible to enzymatic digestion and to eliminate the enzymatic activity of alfimeprase, EDTA was added to the digestion buffer. However, Asp-N is also a metalloproteinase and thus inhibited by EDTA, although to a lesser extent. It was found that 2 mM of EDTA is required to completely eliminate the autodigestion of alfimeprase and unfold alfimeprase to an extent that can be readily digested, while keeping the activity of Asp-N.

Endoproteinase Asp-N-digested alfimeprase was subjected to liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) analysis. Figure 2 ▶ shows the UV chromatograms of Asp-N-digested alfimeprase with disulfide bonds intact and reduced. It is seen from Figure 2 ▶ that chromatographic peaks A-E in the nonreduced map are not present in the reduced map, and chromatographic peaks 1–4 in the reduced map are not present in the nonreduced map. Identities of peaks 1–4 were deduced from their determined masses in combination with the specificity of Asp-N and then confirmed by amino-terminal sequencing. Identities of peaks A-E were deduced from their determined masses in combination with the specificity of Asp-N as well as peptides already identified in peaks 1–4. Table 1 shows the assignments of these chromatographic peaks. Alfimeprase has six cysteine residues (at positions 116, 156, 158, 163, 180, and 196). From peaks C, D, and E, it can be concluded that Cys-116 is linked to the Cys-196 because only these two cysteine residues are present in peaks C, D, and E. However, all of the remaining four cysteine residues (Cys-156, 158, 163, and 180) are present in both peaks A and B, which makes the assignments of these disulfide bonds difficult. From the masses of peak A and B, it is known that all of the four cysteine residues are disulfide linked.

To determine the disulfide linkages between cysteine residues at positions 156, 158, 163, and 180, the compounds represented by peaks A and B were collected and subjected to five cycles of Edman degradation before being analyzed by mass spectrometry. After five cycles of Edman degradation, Cys-156 will be removed from the peptide chain. Figure 3 ▶ shows the mass spectra of the two compounds represented by peaks A and B after five cycles of Edman degradation. Both spectra show a main mass spectral peak with monoisotopic mass at 1391.5 Da, which corresponds to the mass of fragment H 157 –S 170 , with Cys-158 and Cys-163 disulfide linked (theoretical mass 1391.55 Da). Besides the major ions that correspond to peptide H 157 –S 170 , some other ions were also observed in Figure 3 ▶ . These ions were not present when the same procedure was repeated on a new Asp-N digest of alfimeprase (spectra not shown), indicating that these ions are due to contamination in the process. The fact that both peptide chain D 179 –K 183 in fraction A and chain D 171 –K 183 in fraction B were removed by five cycles of Edman degradation is consistent with Cys-156 being linked to Cys-180 and Cys-158 being linked to Cys-163. These disulfide linkages also are consistent with linkages in various members of the matrix metalloproteinase/snake toxin superfamily ( Manning 1995 ).
