---
pmid: '14690591'
title: Assigning function to yeast proteins by integration of technologies.
authors:
- Hazbun TR
- Malmström L
- Anderson S
- Graczyk BJ
- Fox B
- Riffle M
- Sundin BA
- Aranda JD
- McDonald WH
- Chiu CH
- Snydsman BE
- Bradley P
- Muller EG
- Fields S
- Baker D
- Yates JR 3rd
- Davis TN
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00476-3
---

# Assigning function to yeast proteins by integration of technologies.
**Authors:** Hazbun TR, Malmström L, Anderson S, Graczyk BJ, Fox B, Riffle M, Sundin BA, Aranda JD, McDonald WH, Chiu CH, Snydsman BE, Bradley P, Muller EG, Fields S, Baker D, Yates JR 3rd, Davis TN
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00476-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00476-3)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2003 Dec;12(6):1353-65. doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00476-3.

Assigning function to yeast proteins by integration of technologies.

Hazbun TR(1), Malmström L, Anderson S, Graczyk BJ, Fox B, Riffle M, Sundin BA, 
Aranda JD, McDonald WH, Chiu CH, Snydsman BE, Bradley P, Muller EG, Fields S, 
Baker D, Yates JR 3rd, Davis TN.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, 
USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2003 Dec;12(6):1343-4. doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00501-x.

Interpreting genome sequences requires the functional analysis of thousands of 
predicted proteins, many of which are uncharacterized and without obvious 
homologs. To assess whether the roles of large sets of uncharacterized genes can 
be assigned by targeted application of a suite of technologies, we used four 
complementary protein-based methods to analyze a set of 100 uncharacterized but 
essential open reading frames (ORFs) of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. 
These proteins were subjected to affinity purification and mass spectrometry 
analysis to identify copurifying proteins, two-hybrid analysis to identify 
interacting proteins, fluorescence microscopy to localize the proteins, and 
structure prediction methodology to predict structural domains or identify 
remote homologies. Integration of the data assigned function to 48 ORFs using at 
least two of the Gene Ontology (GO) categories of biological process, molecular 
function, and cellular component; 77 ORFs were annotated by at least one method. 
This combination of technologies, coupled with annotation using GO, is a 
powerful approach to classifying genes.

DOI: 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00476-3
PMID: 14690591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
