---
pmid: '28360110'
title: The CFTR trafficking mutation F508del inhibits the constitutive activity of
  SLC26A9.
authors:
- Bertrand CA
- Mitra S
- Mishra SK
- Wang X
- Zhao Y
- Pilewski JM
- Madden DR
- Frizzell RA
journal: Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5495941
doi: 10.1152/ajplung.00178.2016
---

# The CFTR trafficking mutation F508del inhibits the constitutive activity of SLC26A9.
**Authors:** Bertrand CA, Mitra S, Mishra SK, Wang X, Zhao Y, Pilewski JM, Madden DR, Frizzell RA
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajplung.00178.2016](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajplung.00178.2016)
**PMC:** [PMC5495941](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5495941/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2017 Jun 1;312(6):L912-L925. doi: 
10.1152/ajplung.00178.2016. Epub 2017 Mar 30.

The CFTR trafficking mutation F508del inhibits the constitutive activity of 
SLC26A9.

Bertrand CA(1), Mitra S(2), Mishra SK(2), Wang X(2), Zhao Y(3), Pilewski JM(4), 
Madden DR(3), Frizzell RA(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Cell Biology, University of Pittsburgh School 
of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; cbertra@pitt.edu.
(2)Departments of Pediatrics and Cell Biology, University of Pittsburgh School 
of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Hanover, New Hampshire.
(4)Department of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; and.

Several members of the SLC26A family of anion transporters associate with CFTR, 
forming complexes in which CFTR and SLC26A functions are reciprocally regulated. 
These associations are thought to be facilitated by PDZ scaffolding 
interactions. CFTR has been shown to be positively regulated by NHERF-1, and 
negatively regulated by CAL in airway epithelia. However, it is unclear which 
PDZ-domain protein(s) interact with SLC26A9, a SLC26A family member found in 
airway epithelia. We have previously shown that primary, human bronchial 
epithelia (HBE) from non-CF donors exhibit constitutive anion secretion 
attributable to SLC26A9. However, constitutive anion secretion is absent in HBE 
from CF donors. We examined whether changes in SLC26A9 constitutive activity 
could be attributed to a loss of CFTR trafficking, and what role PDZ 
interactions played. HEK293 coexpressing SLC26A9 with the trafficking mutant 
F508del CFTR exhibited a significant reduction in constitutive current compared 
with cells coexpressing SLC26A9 and wt CFTR. We found that SLC26A9 exhibits 
complex glycosylation when coexpressed with F508del CFTR, but its expression at 
the plasma membrane is decreased. SLC26A9 interacted with both NHERF-1 and CAL, 
and its interaction with both significantly increased with coexpression of wt 
CFTR. However, coexpression with F508del CFTR only increased SLC26A9's 
interaction with CAL. Mutation of SLC26A9's PDZ motif decreased this association 
with CAL, and restored its constitutive activity. Correcting aberrant F508del 
CFTR trafficking in CF HBE with corrector VX-809 also restored SLC26A9 activity. 
We conclude that when SLC26A9 is coexpressed with F508del CFTR, its trafficking 
defect leads to a PDZ motif-sensitive intracellular retention of SLC26A9.

Copyright © 2017 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00178.2016
PMCID: PMC5495941
PMID: 28360110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Several members of the SLC26A family of anion transporters associate with CFTR, forming complexes in which CFTR and SLC26A functions are reciprocally regulated. These associations are thought to be facilitated by PDZ scaffolding interactions. CFTR has been shown to be positively regulated by NHERF-1, and negatively regulated by CAL in airway epithelia. However, it is unclear which PDZ-domain protein(s) interact with SLC26A9, a SLC26A family member found in airway epithelia. We have previously shown that primary, human bronchial epithelia (HBE) from non-CF donors exhibit constitutive anion secretion attributable to SLC26A9. However, constitutive anion secretion is absent in HBE from CF donors. We examined whether changes in SLC26A9 constitutive activity could be attributed to a loss of CFTR trafficking, and what role PDZ interactions played. HEK293 coexpressing SLC26A9 with the trafficking mutant F508del CFTR exhibited a significant reduction in constitutive current compared with cells coexpressing SLC26A9 and wt CFTR. We found that SLC26A9 exhibits complex glycosylation when coexpressed with F508del CFTR, but its expression at the plasma membrane is decreased. SLC26A9 interacted with both NHERF-1 and CAL, and its interaction with both significantly increased with coexpression of wt CFTR. However, coexpression with F508del CFTR only increased SLC26A9’s interaction with CAL. Mutation of SLC26A9’s PDZ motif decreased this association with CAL, and restored its constitutive activity. Correcting aberrant F508del CFTR trafficking in CF HBE with corrector VX-809 also restored SLC26A9 activity. We conclude that when SLC26A9 is coexpressed with F508del CFTR, its trafficking defect leads to a PDZ motif-sensitive intracellular retention of SLC26A9.

DISCUSSION

In the present study, we demonstrate that F508del CFTR inhibits SLC26A9 constitutive activity in primary, human bronchial epithelia, and furthermore that this inhibition of constitutive activity is recapitulated when SLC26A9 is coexpressed with F508del CFTR in HEK293 cells ( Figs. 1 and 2 ). Our results suggest that in the presence of F508del CFTR, SLC26A9 is absent at the plasma membrane ( Figs. 2 A , 3 C , 5 F , and 7 C ). PDZ-domain proteins have been shown to play a role in the trafficking and plasma membrane localization of CFTR and other SLC26A transporters ( 21 , 26 , 30 , 32 , 39 ), which led us to investigate their role. Our results identified a significant impact of PDZ-domain protein interactions, especially with CAL, on sequestration of SLC26A9. Differences in PDZ-domain protein co-IP suggest that SLC26A9’s interactions with PDZ-domain proteins are modulated by CFTR coexpression, and sensitive to the F508del mutation. In support of a PDZ-domain protein-mediated effect, we demonstrate that mutating the PDZ motifs of either SLC26A9 or F508del CFTR alleviates the CFTR-induced increase in CAL co-IP ( Fig. 6 ), and restores SLC26A9 plasma membrane expression and constitutive activity when coexpressed with F508del CFTR ( Fig. 7 ). These findings are summarized in Fig. 8 , where we identify several key steps where CFTR appears to influence SLC26A9’s forward trafficking.

Improperly folded F508del CFTR undergoes ERAD ( 38 ); thus the ability of SLC26A9 to co-IP band B F508del CFTR ( Fig. 3 A ) suggests that the proteins commence their interaction in the ER. This is further supported by our evidence that F508del CFTR, expressed alone, can co-IP CAL ( Fig. 6 C ). Since the F508del CFTR-induced increase in SLC26A9’s ability to co-IP CAL can be abrogated by mutating the PDZ motif of either SLC26A9 or F508del CFTR ( Fig. 6 ), our data suggest that the proteins are colocalized, initially, when binding to CAL commences. Thus our data indicate that CAL is present and interacting with both proteins, at least transiently, in the ER, as shown in Fig. 8 , step A . However, F508del CFTR remains core-glycosylated while the majority of co-expressed SLC26A9 exhibits complex glycosylation ( Fig. 3 ), suggesting the proteins are not colocalized in the TGN where CAL is thought to be primarily localized ( 26 , 32 ). This spatial discrepancy is also evident in the IF co-localization data ( Fig. 5 H ). Thus our data suggest that F508del CFTR and SLC26A9 must separate before or during trafficking between the ER and Golgi complex, shown in Fig. 8 , step B .

We have not identified the locus or regulatory mechanism where F508del CFTR and SLC26A9 part company, but additional regulatory mechanisms may come into play. CFTR is known to recruit and/or associate with multiple proteins in the CAL scaffolding complex that regulate its fate ( 10 , 11 , 14 , 32 , 47 ). Thus the presence of wt or F508del CFTR may differentially recruit additional proteins to the PDZ scaffolding interactome that also influence SLC26A9 ( 27 ). These additional proteins, noted in Fig. 8 , have been shown to influence CFTR trafficking from the TGN, but a potential role in ER to Golgi traffic is unclear at this time. Our glycosylation data indicate that SLC26A9 traffics to the TGN whether expressed with wt or F508del CFTR ( Fig. 3 ); thus an additional, CFTR-influenced regulatory interaction likely occurs at this stage, as shown in Fig. 8 , step C .

SLC26A9 demonstrates affinity for the same PDZ domain proteins as CFTR ( Table 1 ), and co-IPs endogenous CAL and NHERF-1 in HEK293 cells ( Fig. 4 A ). The significant increase in the co-IP of both PDZ-domain proteins when SLC26A9 was coexpressed with wt CFTR was most intriguing ( Fig. 4 ). Factors that could account for this increase include a CFTR-induced change in SLC26A9’s affinity for the PDZ-domain proteins, and/or the possibility that coimmunoprecipitated CFTR itself binds additional CAL and NHERF-1. However, our data are consistent with the hypothesis that binding to a common PDZ-domain protein facilitates the interaction between the STAS domain and unphosphorylated R domain ( 28 ), as discussed below.

We expect an increase in apparent binding affinity if CFTR and SLC26A9's PDZ motifs are located in close proximity, due to avidity, as both NHERF-1 and dimerized CAL ( 59 ) have two binding domains. This appears quite likely considering the relatively weak affinity CFTR and SLC26A9 individually display for CAL ( Table 1 ). Additionally, we note that SLC26A9 forms SDS-resistant dimers ( Fig. 3 ), which would contribute two PDZ motifs in addition to CFTR’s PDZ motif, thus potentially causing an avidity effect on their own. When and where SLC26A9 dimerizes, and how this influences the fates of F508del CFTR and SLC26A9, is currently unknown. Based on our glycosidase assay ( Fig. 3 ), which indicates that dimers exhibiting core glycosylation are present, we suggest a model where displacement of F508del CFTR from the ER-CAL interactome ( Fig. 8 , step A ) leads to a dimerized CAL interaction with both PDZ motifs in the SLC26A9 dimer. If this occurs, the relatively weak affinity SLC26A9 displays for CAL ( Table 1 ) could be significantly increased due to avidity. For wt CFTR, we anticipate that dimerized CAL would continue to interact with both wt CFTR and SLC26A9 ( Fig. 8 , step B ) during trafficking from the ER to the TGN. In this model, the continued presence of wt CFTR would attract proteins shown to disrupt the CFTR-CAL interactome to release the SLC26A9-CFTR complex, whereas the dimerized CAL-SLC26A9 interactome may lack the ability to recruit these proteins ( Fig. 8 , step C ). This remains to be shown.

A complex interaction model has been proposed for CFTR-SLC26A family members. First, a direct interaction between the STAS domain of the SLC26A protein and the R domain of CFTR leads to their reciprocal, synergistic regulation ( 28 ); the R domain of CFTR must be phosphorylated to mediate this reciprocal activity. Second, binding of their PDZ motifs to the same PDZ-domain protein facilitates the interaction between CFTR’s R domain and the SLC26A STAS domain ( 21 , 28 , 30 ). Ko and colleagues ( 28 ) further showed that STAS domain, R domain binding was enhanced by PKA phosphorylation of CFTR’s R domain. The dual effect of PKA phosphorylation of CFTR on binding and activity lends some difficulty to interpreting the relevance of PDZ-domain proteins in establishing the STAS domain, R domain interaction. A better model for assessing their relevance might be found in studies of SLC26A4 (aka Pendrin), which naturally lacks a PDZ motif. SLC26A4 is found in multiple tissues that coexpress CFTR, including HBE ( 1 ), the airway serous cell line Calu-3 ( 22 , 23 ), and the parotid duct ( 50 ). Despite significant evidence indicating that SLC26A4 participates in anion exchange in these cells, there is no evidence that it interacts with CFTR physically or functionally through a STAS domain, R domain interaction ( 1 , 22 , 23 , 50 ).

When wt CFTR and SLC26A9 were coexpressed, we showed that the generation of synergistically enhanced forskolin-stimulated currents at the plasma membrane does not require that SLC26A9 have an intact PDZ motif ( Fig. 7 B ). This result may indicate that NHERF-1 does not play a significant role in forward trafficking of SLC26A9 to the plasma membrane, although it is also possible that forskolin stimulation of CFTR compensated for loss of SLC26A9’s NHERF-1 association by enhancing the STAS domain, R domain interaction ( 28 ). Of note, we did not treat cells destined for co-IP experiments with the PKA activator forskolin, whereas cells were forskolin treated for the current measurements. Consequently, our results are consistent with the concept that PDZ-domain protein interactions are required for physical SLC26A9 STAS domain-CFTR R domain interaction when the R domain is not phosphorylated.

It is curious that the magnitude of CAL co-IP is similar whether SLC26A9 is coexpressed with F508del or wt CFTR, given that the increase in NHERF-1 co-IP seen with wt CFTR coexpression suggests that SLC26A9 (and wt CFTR) traffic out of the TGN and to the plasma membrane ( Fig. 4 A ). There are two potential mechanisms that may account for this. First, Ward and Kopito ( 58 ) have shown that up to 75% of wt CFTR fails to mature past the ER when transiently transfected into HEK293 cells, instead undergoing premature degradation along the same trajectory as F508del CFTR. Thus a significant portion of SLC26A9 may still experience the same trafficking impediment if wt CFTR is removed from the ER-CAL complex, as we suggest occurs with F508del CFTR ( Fig. 8 , step A ). Second, wt CFTR eventually undergoes lysosomal degradation, and this has been shown to occur via an interaction with CAL in the recycling endosome ( 10 , 11 ). These additional factors may account for the similarity in CAL co-IP.

As noted, CAL, together with its interacting proteins ( 10 , 11 , 47 ), plays a significant role in targeting mature CFTR for lysosomal degradation ( 12 , 13 , 30 ). However, the association between SLC26A9 and CAL does not appear to accelerate the degradation of SLC26A9, as levels of mature SLC26A9 are similar whether coexpressed with wt or F508del CFTR ( Fig. 3 ). CAL has been implicated in other cellular functions, such as regulation of epithelial tight junction proteins ( 37 ), inhibition of ubiquitination-dependent degradation of the mGluR5a receptor ( 15 ), and stabilization of intracellular β1-adrenergic receptor ( 29 ); thus CAL’s intracellular retention of SLC26A9 is not atypical, per se. Additional evidence for a CFTR-induced effect on CAL’s ability to bind other CF-relevant proteins is modest at this time: Gentzsch et al. ( 24 ) reported that a small portion of the Golgi-localized chloride channel ClC-3B coassociated with CFTR, and both were negatively regulated by overexpression of CAL, whereas Pelaseyed and Hansson ( 45 ) found that a CAL-induced downregulation of MUC3 could be rescued by overexpression of wt CFTR. Our study demonstrates a significant, CFTR-induced impact of CAL on SLC26A9 function that can be overcome if CFTR engages in forward trafficking through the trans-Golgi, as occurs through coexpression with wt CFTR, or by pharmacophore correction of F508del CFTR’s trafficking defect. Thus intracellular PDZ-domain protein interactions may confer a SLC26A9 regulatory mode in which wt and mutant CFTRs participate.

It is known that, at the plasma membrane, CFTR is part of a protein interactome that can include signaling molecules, receptors, and other ion channels; furthermore, PDZ-domain proteins appear to play a central role in assembling these complexes ( 26 , 32 ). In the current study, we have shown that CFTR can exert a regulatory influence by modifying SLC26A9’s interactions with PDZ-domain proteins in different cellular compartments, and specifically along the protein maturation pathway. This possibility opens new avenues of approach to determining how CFTR exerts its regulatory influence. Finally, we note that SLC26A9 has the potential to restore significant chloride secretion to airway epithelia, and that it appears to be much further along the maturation pathway than is F508del CFTR, making it an alternative chloride channel to investigate in CF therapies.
