---
pmid: '15823540'
title: Defective skeletogenesis with kidney stone formation in dwarf zebrafish mutant
  for trpm7.
authors:
- Elizondo MR
- Arduini BL
- Paulsen J
- MacDonald EL
- Sabel JL
- Henion PD
- Cornell RA
- Parichy DM
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2005.02.050
---

# Defective skeletogenesis with kidney stone formation in dwarf zebrafish mutant for trpm7.
**Authors:** Elizondo MR, Arduini BL, Paulsen J, MacDonald EL, Sabel JL, Henion PD, Cornell RA, Parichy DM
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2005.02.050](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2005.02.050)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2005 Apr 12;15(7):667-71. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2005.02.050.

Defective skeletogenesis with kidney stone formation in dwarf zebrafish mutant 
for trpm7.

Elizondo MR(1), Arduini BL, Paulsen J, MacDonald EL, Sabel JL, Henion PD, 
Cornell RA, Parichy DM.

Author information:
(1)Section of Integrative Biology, Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, 
University of Texas at Austin, 1 University Station C0930, Austin, Texas 78712, 
USA.

Development of the adult form requires coordinated growth and patterning of 
multiple traits in response to local gene activity as well as to global 
endocrine and physiological effectors. An excellent example of such coordination 
is the skeleton. Skeletal development depends on the differentiation and 
morphogenesis of multiple cell types to generate elements with distinct forms 
and functions throughout the body. We show that zebrafish touchtone/nutria 
mutants exhibit severe growth retardation and gross alterations in skeletal 
development in addition to embryonic melanophore and touch-response defects. 
These alterations include accelerated endochondral ossification but delayed 
intramembranous ossification, as well as skeletal deformities. We show that the 
touchtone/nutria phenotype results from mutations in trpm7, which encodes a 
transient receptor potential (TRP) family member that functions as both a cation 
channel and kinase. We find trpm7 expression in the mesonephric kidney and show 
that mutants develop kidney stones, indicating renal dysfunction. These results 
identify a requirement for trpm7 in growth and skeletogenesis and highlight the 
potential of forward genetic approaches to uncover physiological mechanisms 
contributing to the development of adult form.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2005.02.050
PMID: 15823540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
