---
pmid: '38987591'
title: Phage anti-CRISPR control by an RNA- and DNA-binding helix-turn-helix protein.
authors:
- Birkholz N
- Kamata K
- Feussner M
- Wilkinson ME
- Cuba Samaniego C
- Migur A
- Kimanius D
- Ceelen M
- Went SC
- Usher B
- Blower TR
- Brown CM
- Beisel CL
- Weinberg Z
- Fagerlund RD
- Jackson SA
- Fineran PC
journal: Nature
year: '2024'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-07644-1
---

# Phage anti-CRISPR control by an RNA- and DNA-binding helix-turn-helix protein.
**Authors:** Birkholz N, Kamata K, Feussner M, Wilkinson ME, Cuba Samaniego C, Migur A, Kimanius D, Ceelen M, Went SC, Usher B, Blower TR, Brown CM, Beisel CL, Weinberg Z, Fagerlund RD, Jackson SA, Fineran PC
**Journal:** Nature (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-024-07644-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07644-1)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2024 Jul;631(8021):670-677. doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-07644-1. Epub 2024
 Jul 10.

Phage anti-CRISPR control by an RNA- and DNA-binding helix-turn-helix protein.

Birkholz N(1)(2)(3)(4), Kamata K(1)(2), Feussner M(5), Wilkinson 
ME(6)(7)(8)(9)(10), Cuba Samaniego C(11), Migur A(12), Kimanius D(13), Ceelen 
M(1)(14), Went SC(15), Usher B(15), Blower TR(15), Brown CM(16), Beisel 
CL(12)(17), Weinberg Z(5), Fagerlund RD(1)(2)(3)(4), Jackson SA(1)(2)(3)(4), 
Fineran PC(18)(19)(20)(21).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New 
Zealand.
(2)Bioprotection Aotearoa, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(3)Genetics Otago, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(4)Maurice Wilkins Centre for Molecular Biodiscovery, University of Otago, 
Dunedin, New Zealand.
(5)Bioinformatics Group, Department of Computer Science and Interdisciplinary 
Centre for Bioinformatics, Leipzig University, Leipzig, Germany.
(6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(7)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(8)McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(9)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(10)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(11)Computational Biology Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 
PA, USA.
(12)Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research (HIRI), Helmholtz 
Centre for Infection Research (HZI), Würzburg, Germany.
(13)CZ Imaging Institute, Redwood City, CA, USA.
(14)Institute for Integrative Biology, Department of Environmental Systems 
Science, ETH Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(15)Department of Biosciences, Durham University, Durham, UK.
(16)Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(17)Medical Faculty, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(18)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New 
Zealand. peter.fineran@otago.ac.nz.
(19)Bioprotection Aotearoa, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. 
peter.fineran@otago.ac.nz.
(20)Genetics Otago, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. 
peter.fineran@otago.ac.nz.
(21)Maurice Wilkins Centre for Molecular Biodiscovery, University of Otago, 
Dunedin, New Zealand. peter.fineran@otago.ac.nz.

In all organisms, regulation of gene expression must be adjusted to meet 
cellular requirements and frequently involves helix-turn-helix (HTH) domain 
proteins1. For instance, in the arms race between bacteria and bacteriophages, 
rapid expression of phage anti-CRISPR (acr) genes upon infection enables evasion 
from CRISPR-Cas defence; transcription is then repressed by an 
HTH-domain-containing anti-CRISPR-associated (Aca) protein, probably to reduce 
fitness costs from excessive expression2-5. However, how a single HTH regulator 
adjusts anti-CRISPR production to cope with increasing phage genome copies and 
accumulating acr mRNA is unknown. Here we show that the HTH domain of the 
regulator Aca2, in addition to repressing Acr synthesis transcriptionally 
through DNA binding, inhibits translation of mRNAs by binding conserved RNA 
stem-loops and blocking ribosome access. The cryo-electron microscopy structure 
of the approximately 40 kDa Aca2-RNA complex demonstrates how the versatile HTH 
domain specifically discriminates RNA from DNA binding sites. These combined 
regulatory modes are widespread in the Aca2 family and facilitate CRISPR-Cas 
inhibition in the face of rapid phage DNA replication without toxic acr 
overexpression. Given the ubiquity of HTH-domain-containing proteins, it is 
anticipated that many more of them elicit regulatory control by dual DNA and RNA 
binding.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-024-07644-1
PMID: 38987591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
