---
pmid: '22293751'
title: APRIN is a cell cycle specific BRCA2-interacting protein required for genome
  integrity and a predictor of outcome after chemotherapy in breast cancer.
authors:
- Brough R
- Bajrami I
- Vatcheva R
- Natrajan R
- Reis-Filho JS
- Lord CJ
- Ashworth A
journal: EMBO J
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3297997
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.490
---

# APRIN is a cell cycle specific BRCA2-interacting protein required for genome integrity and a predictor of outcome after chemotherapy in breast cancer.
**Authors:** Brough R, Bajrami I, Vatcheva R, Natrajan R, Reis-Filho JS, Lord CJ, Ashworth A
**Journal:** EMBO J (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2011.490](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2011.490)
**PMC:** [PMC3297997](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3297997/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2012 Mar 7;31(5):1160-76. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.490. Epub 2012 Jan
31.

APRIN is a cell cycle specific BRCA2-interacting protein required for genome 
integrity and a predictor of outcome after chemotherapy in breast cancer.

Brough R(1), Bajrami I, Vatcheva R, Natrajan R, Reis-Filho JS, Lord CJ, Ashworth 
A.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK Gene Function and Regulation Group, London, UK.

Mutations in BRCA2 confer an increased risk of cancer development, at least in 
part because the BRCA2 protein is required for the maintenance of genomic 
integrity. Here, we use proteomic profiling to identify APRIN (PDS5B), a 
cohesion-associated protein, as a BRCA2-associated protein. After exposure of 
cells to hydroxyurea or aphidicolin, APRIN and other cohesin components 
associate with BRCA2 in early S-phase. We demonstrate that APRIN expression is 
required for the normal response to DNA-damaging agents, the nuclear 
localisation of RAD51 and BRCA2 and efficient homologous recombination. The 
clinical significance of these findings is indicated by the observation that the 
BRCA2/APRIN interaction is compromised by BRCA2 missense variants of previously 
unknown significance and that APRIN expression levels are associated with 
histological grade in breast cancer and the outcome of breast cancer patients 
treated with DNA-damaging chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.490
PMCID: PMC3297997
PMID: 22293751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AA and CJL are inventors named on patents 
describing the use of PARP inhibitors and may benefit under the ICR ‘Rewards to 
Investors’ Scheme.

## Full Text

Abstract

Mutations in BRCA2 confer an increased risk of cancer development, at least in part because the BRCA2 protein is required for the maintenance of genomic integrity. Here, we use proteomic profiling to identify APRIN (PDS5B), a cohesion-associated protein, as a BRCA2-associated protein. After exposure of cells to hydroxyurea or aphidicolin, APRIN and other cohesin components associate with BRCA2 in early S-phase. We demonstrate that APRIN expression is required for the normal response to DNA-damaging agents, the nuclear localisation of RAD51 and BRCA2 and efficient homologous recombination. The clinical significance of these findings is indicated by the observation that the BRCA2/APRIN interaction is compromised by BRCA2 missense variants of previously unknown significance and that APRIN expression levels are associated with histological grade in breast cancer and the outcome of breast cancer patients treated with DNA-damaging chemotherapy.

Introduction

Inheritance of a single mutated allele of BRCA2 strongly predisposes to breast cancer and a number of other malignancies ( Wooster and Weber, 2003 ). BRCA2 encodes a very large protein (3418 amino acids (aa)) that is likely to have multiple cellular functions but is particularly important for the repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) by the process of homologous recombination (HR). HR is a sequence-conservative process that involves the identification of a homologous DNA sequence to that present at the DSB, and the utilisation of this sequence as a template for repair. As part of this process, BRCA2 sequesters the DNA recombinase RAD51, mobilises it to the site of damage and then facilitates the formation of helical RAD51-single-stranded (ss) DNA nucleoprotein filaments either side of the DSB. These nucleoprotein filaments invade double-stranded (ds) DNA, usually the sister chromatid, that has homology to the site of DNA damage. Following strand invasion, DNA synthesis is instigated using the homologous sequence as a template. This ultimately leads to the restoration of the original sequence at the damaged site. However, in the absence of functional BRCA2, cells use alternative, more error-prone forms of DNA repair, with the inevitable consequence that the genome becomes peppered with chromosomal rearrangements and breaks. This genetic instability is thought to foster the development of malignancy ( Gudmundsdottir and Ashworth, 2006 ).

In addition to RAD51, BRCA2 has also been shown to interact with a number of other proteins that control HR including PALB2 ( Xia et al, 2006 ), FANCG ( Hussain et al, 2003 ), FANCD2 ( Hussain et al, 2004 ), BRCA1 ( Chen et al, 1998 ) and DSS1 ( Marston et al, 1999 ). In a similar fashion to BRCA2 deficiency, mutations in BRCA2-binding proteins can also result in compromised HR efficiency and sensitisation to DNA damage. Notably, biallelic mutations in the BRCA2-interacting proteins PALB2, FANCD2 and FANCG (and also biallelic mutations in BRCA2 itself) cause Fanconi anaemia (FA), a disease characterised by cellular sensitivity to DNA cross-linking agents ( Moldovan and D’Andrea, 2009 ). The interplay between other FA susceptibility genes and BRCA2 is currently unclear, although it has been demonstrated that FANCD2 and BRCA2 associate in response to damage and co-localise at stalled replication forks ( Hussain et al, 2004 ).

Orthologues of BRCA2 have also been identified in lower organisms. Bioinformatic analyses identified a candidate BRCA2 orthologue in Drosophila melanogaster , CG30169/dmBrca2, ( Lo et al, 2003 ) and subsequent analysis suggests that dmBrca2 shares many of the characteristics of its human orthologue despite being a much smaller and simpler protein in structure ( Brough et al, 2008 ). The mechanism of DSB repair and the essential components of this process are also well conserved between mammals and Drosophila ( Rong and Golic, 2003 ). Here, we exploited dmBRCA2 to identify additional BRCA2-interacting proteins and in doing so identify APRIN as a novel determinant of RAD51 localisation, HR and the clinical response to chemotherapy.

Discussion

We have identified APRIN as a protein that interacts with the breast and ovarian cancer tumour suppressor BRCA2. APRIN has been previously characterised as a cohesin-associated protein and has been shown to be dysregulated in cancer ( Beckmann et al, 1996 ; Edwards et al, 1998 ; Harada et al, 2001 ; Zhang et al, 2008 ). We show here that APRIN modulates HR, is present at DSBs and influences the response to DNA-damaging agents. Importantly, analysis of the BRCA2/APRIN interaction suggests that BRCA2 variants with unassigned functional significance modulate the BRCA2/APRIN interaction. APRIN and BRCA2 likely sit within a network of proteins with known functions in DNA replication, repair and cohesion. APRIN appears to play a major role in regulating the interaction between BRCA2 and proteins such as CDC45, PCNA and RAD21 as well as having an influence on the association between BRCA2 and the key regulators of HR, RAD51 and PALB2. Finally, the clinical significance of our observations is underscored by the association of APRIN expression levels with pathological grade in breast cancer and clinical response to DNA-damaging chemotherapy.

Our data provide the first evidence of a direct linkage between elements of the cohesin complex and the tumour suppressor BRCA2. Previous reports have implicated elements of the cohesin complex and associated proteins in DNA repair. For example, the absence of a fully functional cohesin complex is essential for DSB repair after DNA replication in budding yeast ( Sjogren and Nasmyth, 2001 ) and in human cells elements of the cohesin complex are recruited to DSBs and are essential for competent HR ( Potts et al, 2006 ). A possible model is that cohesin enables HR by holding sister chromatids together when DSBs occur. This localisation of sister chromatids should allow strand invasion and DNA exchange between sister chromatids to take place, thus enabling the repair process ( Sjogren and Strom, 2010 ). However, it should be noted that this model of DNA damage-induced cohesion is primarily based upon studies in budding yeast, although the formation of a DSB has been shown to increase sister chromatid proximity in chicken DT40 cells ( Dodson and Morrison, 2009 ). Nevertheless, our findings support a model whereby cohesin-related proteins such as APRIN are crucial to DNA repair processes that involve sister chromatids, such as HR. Given the pathogenic implications of dysregulated HR, it also seems reasonable that some level of co-ordination and localisation between damage-induced sister chromatid cohesion and the HR machinery could exist. It is possible that the interactions between BRCA2, APRIN and other elements of the replication and cohesion machinery may underlie this link. Indeed, we have shown that APRIN is required for the interaction of BRCA2 with a number of components of the HR and cohesin complexes ( Figure 6C ), perhaps suggesting that APRIN serves as the interface between the ostensibly distinct HR and cohesion activities.

One of the remarkable features of the APRIN gene is its close proximity to BRCA2 on chromosome 13. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at 13q is more frequently found in higher-grade ovarian tumours rather than in lower-grade ovarian cancers ( Dodson et al, 1993 ). LOH distal to BRCA2 is common and this is a region that also contains the RB1 locus. However, silencing of the RB1 gene has only been seen in a small proportion of ovarian tumours, supporting the hypothesis that an additional tumour suppressor gene exists, distal to BRCA2 ( Liu et al, 1994 ). In fact, a strong association between genomic loss 250 kb distal to BRCA2 and reduced survival in breast cancer patients has been observed ( Hansen et al, 2002 ). APRIN is positioned 180–380 kb distal to BRCA2 and LOH at the intragenic APRIN microsatellite marker, D13S171 ( Geck et al, 2001 ), has linked this protein to cancers of the prostate ( Edwards et al, 1998 ) and breast ( Beckmann et al, 1996 ). More recently, LOH analysis demonstrated allelic loss in 72% of oesophageal squamous cell carcinomas, which significantly correlated with higher pathological grade ( Harada et al, 2001 ; Zhang et al, 2008 ). Similarly, reduced expression of APRIN in primary breast tumour samples has also been reported ( Chen et al, 2007 ). APRIN is also known as the androgen-induced proliferative shutoff protein, AS3, and has been associated with the risk of prostate cancer ( Geck et al, 1997 ).

We demonstrate here that a significant proportion of breast tumours express low APRIN levels as assessed by IHC. We also demonstrate methylation at a number of CpGs located within the APRIN promoter in breast cancer cell lines, which suggests a potential mechanism for the reduced APRIN expression detected in the tumour samples. The presence of low APRIN expression statistically correlated with high histological grade and ER-negative disease. Importantly, examination of APRIN expression in tumours from patients subsequently treated with a DNA-damaging chemotherapy uncovered a correlation between low tumour APRIN expression and a favourable response to therapy. Given the demonstration that APRIN can modulate HR and APRIN is a BRCA2-binding protein, we hypothesise that this involvement with the DNA repair apparatus explains the clinical correlate. However, we cannot exclude the possibility that other functions of APRIN, such as in steroid hormone receptor signalling ( Geck et al, 2000 ), also contribute to the overall response to therapy. Analysis of various tumour subtypes detected an increased survival correlation for low APRIN expression in both basal and HER2-amplified cancers after treatment with anthracycline-based chemotherapy (data not shown). Given that the cohort analysed in this study was retrospectively accrued, that all patients received the adjuvant systemic therapy and that an association with survival was observed in ER-negative diseases only, the associations with outcome reported here should be considered as hypothesis generating rather than definitive. However, based on our results, further studies testing APRIN as a potential biomarker of response to DNA-damaging agents in ER-negative breast cancers are warranted.

In summary, we have shown that APRIN plays a key role in DNA repair and genomic integrity and this, in turn, may lead to low APRIN expressing tumours, demonstrating increased response to DNA-damaging chemotherapy.
