---
pmid: '26889034'
title: VP8, the Major Tegument Protein of Bovine Herpesvirus 1, Interacts with Cellular
  STAT1 and Inhibits Interferon Beta Signaling.
authors:
- Afroz S
- Brownlie R
- Fodje M
- van Drunen Littel-van den Hurk S
journal: J Virol
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC4859699
doi: 10.1128/JVI.00017-16
---

# VP8, the Major Tegument Protein of Bovine Herpesvirus 1, Interacts with Cellular STAT1 and Inhibits Interferon Beta Signaling.
**Authors:** Afroz S, Brownlie R, Fodje M, van Drunen Littel-van den Hurk S
**Journal:** J Virol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.00017-16](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00017-16)
**PMC:** [PMC4859699](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4859699/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2016 Apr 29;90(10):4889-4904. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00017-16. Print 2016
May  15.

VP8, the Major Tegument Protein of Bovine Herpesvirus 1, Interacts with Cellular 
STAT1 and Inhibits Interferon Beta Signaling.

Afroz S(1)(2), Brownlie R(1), Fodje M(3), van Drunen Littel-van den Hurk 
S(4)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)VIDO-InterVac, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.
(2)Vaccinology & Immunotherapeutics, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, 
Canada.
(3)Canadian Light Source, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.
(4)VIDO-InterVac, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada 
sylvia.vandenhurk@usask.ca.
(5)Microbiology & Immunology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.

The UL47 gene product, VP8, is the most abundant tegument protein of bovine 
herpesvirus 1 (BoHV-1). Previously, we demonstrated that a UL47-deleted BoHV-1 
mutant (BoHV1-ΔUL47) exhibits 100-fold-reduced virulence in vitro and is 
avirulent in vivo In this study, we demonstrated that VP8 expression or BoHV-1 
infection inhibits interferon beta (IFN-β) signaling by using an 
IFN-α/β-responsive plasmid in a luciferase assay. As transducer and activator of 
transcription (STAT) is an essential component in the IFN-signaling pathways, 
the effect of VP8 on STAT was investigated. An interaction between VP8 and STAT1 
was established by coimmunoprecipitation assays in both VP8-transfected and 
BoHV-1-infected cells. Two domains of VP8, amino acids 259 to 482 and 632 to 
686, were found to be responsible for its interaction with STAT1. The expression 
of VP8 did not induce STAT1 ubiquitination or degradation. Moreover, VP8 did not 
reduce STAT1 tyrosine phosphorylation to downregulate IFN-β signaling. However, 
the expression of VP8 or a version of VP8 (amino acids 219 to 741) that contains 
the STAT1-interacting domains but not the nuclear localization signal prevented 
nuclear accumulation of STAT1. Inhibition of nuclear accumulation of STAT1 also 
occurred during BoHV-1 infection, while nuclear translocation of STAT1 was 
observed in BoHV1-ΔUL47-infected cells. During BoHV-1 infection, VP8 was 
detected in the cytoplasm at 2 h postinfection without any de novo protein 
synthesis, at which time STAT1 was already retained in the cytoplasm. These 
results suggest that viral VP8 downregulates IFN-β signaling early during 
infection, thus playing a role in overcoming the antiviral response of 
BoHV-1-infected cells.
IMPORTANCE: Since VP8 is the most abundant protein in BoHV-1 virions and thus 
may be released in large amounts into the host cell immediately upon infection, 
we proposed that it might have a function in the establishment of conditions 
suitable for viral replication. Indeed, while nonessential in vitro, it is 
critical for BoHV-1 replication in vivo In this study, we determined that VP8 
plays a role in downregulation of the antiviral host response by inhibiting 
IFN-β signaling. VP8 interacted with and prevented nuclear accumulation of STAT1 
at 2 h postinfection in the absence of de novo viral protein synthesis. Two 
domains of VP8, amino acids 259 to 482 and 632 to 686, were found to be 
responsible for this interaction. These results provide a new functional role 
for VP8 in BoHV-1 infection and a potential explanation for the lack of viral 
replication of the UL47 deletion mutant in cattle.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00017-16
PMCID: PMC4859699
PMID: 26889034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

ABSTRACT

The U L 47 gene product, VP8, is the most abundant tegument protein of bovine herpesvirus 1 (BoHV-1). Previously, we demonstrated that a U L 47 -deleted BoHV-1 mutant (BoHV1-ΔU L 47) exhibits 100-fold-reduced virulence in vitro and is avirulent in vivo . In this study, we demonstrated that VP8 expression or BoHV-1 infection inhibits interferon beta (IFN-β) signaling by using an IFN-α/β-responsive plasmid in a luciferase assay. As transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) is an essential component in the IFN-signaling pathways, the effect of VP8 on STAT was investigated. An interaction between VP8 and STAT1 was established by coimmunoprecipitation assays in both VP8-transfected and BoHV-1-infected cells. Two domains of VP8, amino acids 259 to 482 and 632 to 686, were found to be responsible for its interaction with STAT1. The expression of VP8 did not induce STAT1 ubiquitination or degradation. Moreover, VP8 did not reduce STAT1 tyrosine phosphorylation to downregulate IFN-β signaling. However, the expression of VP8 or a version of VP8 (amino acids 219 to 741) that contains the STAT1-interacting domains but not the nuclear localization signal prevented nuclear accumulation of STAT1. Inhibition of nuclear accumulation of STAT1 also occurred during BoHV-1 infection, while nuclear translocation of STAT1 was observed in BoHV1-ΔU L 47-infected cells. During BoHV-1 infection, VP8 was detected in the cytoplasm at 2 h postinfection without any de novo protein synthesis, at which time STAT1 was already retained in the cytoplasm. These results suggest that viral VP8 downregulates IFN-β signaling early during infection, thus playing a role in overcoming the antiviral response of BoHV-1-infected cells.

IMPORTANCE Since VP8 is the most abundant protein in BoHV-1 virions and thus may be released in large amounts into the host cell immediately upon infection, we proposed that it might have a function in the establishment of conditions suitable for viral replication. Indeed, while nonessential in vitro , it is critical for BoHV-1 replication in vivo . In this study, we determined that VP8 plays a role in downregulation of the antiviral host response by inhibiting IFN-β signaling. VP8 interacted with and prevented nuclear accumulation of STAT1 at 2 h postinfection in the absence of de novo viral protein synthesis. Two domains of VP8, amino acids 259 to 482 and 632 to 686, were found to be responsible for this interaction. These results provide a new functional role for VP8 in BoHV-1 infection and a potential explanation for the lack of viral replication of the U L 47 deletion mutant in cattle.

INTRODUCTION

Bovine herpesvirus 1 (BoHV-1) is responsible for several clinical manifestations, including rhinotracheitis, vulvovaginitis, and conjunctivitis, in cattle ( 1 ). BoHV-1 is composed of a double-stranded DNA surrounded by a nucleocapsid, a tegument, and an envelope ( 2 ). Although the tegument is a major constituent in the BoHV-1 virion, it is the least studied. The tegument consists of at least 20 virus-encoded proteins (reviewed in reference 3 ). Herpesvirus infection is mediated by the interaction of glycoproteins such as gB, gC, and gD with cellular proteins ( 4 ). The majority of the tegument proteins are then released into the cytoplasm, indicating that these proteins are the first to interact with the intracellular environment ( 5 ). Herpesvirus tegument proteins are involved in various functions, including capsid transport, DNA replication, transcriptional and translational regulation, and viral assembly and egress ( 3 ). These functions suggest that tegument proteins contribute to the establishment of conditions suitable for viral replication.

The U L 47 gene product, VP8, is a 97-kDa tegument protein and the most abundant protein in BoHV-1 virions ( 6 ). Although BoHV-1 VP8 is not essential for viral infection, a U L 47 -deleted mutant (BoHV1-ΔU L 47) exhibits a small tegument structure and impaired growth in cell culture and is avirulent in cattle ( 7 ). In addition, BoHV-1 VP8 plays a role in induction of humoral and cellular immunity ( 8 ). VP8 is monoubiquitinated and interacts with DNA damage binding protein-1 (DDB1) ( 9 ), which is a component of the Cul4A-DDB1 E3 ubiquitin ligase complex ( 10 ). Furthermore, VP8 remodeled the distribution of promyelocytic leukemia (PML) nuclear bodies (NBs) ( 11 ).

Viruses can establish an infection in the host cells by overcoming the antiviral defense mechanisms. The antiviral state is established by secretion of type I interferon (IFN), which is needed for the activation of other cellular genes. Interferons are categorized into type I (IFN-α, IFN-β, IFN-ω, IFN-κ, and IFN-ε), type II (IFN-γ), and type III (IFN-λ) depending on their primary structure (reviewed in references 12 and 13 ). IFN-α and -β are synthesized by cells in response to viral infections, whereas IFN-γ is secreted by activated T lymphocytes and natural killer cells in virus-infected cells. These types of IFN are involved in limiting the growth of target cells and in influencing cell apoptosis, thereby arresting viral spread. The activity of these IFNs is initiated by the binding of IFN-α/β and IFN-γ to their cell surface receptors ( 14 ). Some IFN-mediated cascades are regulated by the Janus tyrosine kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK/STAT) pathway, whereas others are regulated by STATs to optimize the transcription regulation of target genes ( 12 ). IFN-λs are induced by either interferon response factor 3 (IRF3), IRF7, or NF-κB pathways ( 13 ). Recently, IFN-λ was identified as having antiviral properties against numerous viruses.

The activation of the JAK/STAT signaling pathway is initiated by binding of IFN-α/β to their receptors, which are composed of IFNAR1 and IFNAR2 subunits. Upon binding of IFN-α/β to its receptors, the IFNAR1 and IFNAR2 complex activates tyrosine kinase 2 (Tyk2) and Janus kinase 1 (JAK1) by transphosphorylation. Activated Tyk2 phosphorylates IFNAR1 on tyrosine 466, making a platform to bind STAT2. This facilitates phosphorylation of STAT2 by activated Tyk2, which in turn recruits STAT1. The newly recruited STAT1 is phosphorylated on residue tyrosine 701 by JAK1. Phosphorylated STAT1 and STAT2 form a heterodimer, which dissociates from the receptor and then translocates to the nucleus to bind with IRF9 and form a heterotrimeric complex, the IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) complex. The ISGF3 complex binds to the IFN response element for the induction of IFN-stimulated genes (reviewed in reference 14 ).

Most viruses have developed specific mechanisms to circumvent the IFN response, either by reducing IFN production or by downregulating the IFN signaling cascade ( 14 ). For example, rabies virus P protein ( 15 ), simian virus 5 (SV5) V protein ( 16 ), respiratory syncytial virus ( 17 ), human parainfluenza virus type 1 virus V protein ( 18 ), and mumps virus V protein ( 19 ) inhibit IFN-β signaling by proteasome-mediated degradation of STAT1 or STAT2, by reducing phosphorylation of STAT1 or STAT2, or by inhibiting nuclear translocation of STAT1. During BoHV-1 infection, inhibition of IFN signaling by infected cell protein bICP0 through degradation of IRF3 was observed ( 20 ). In the absence of IRF3 expression, bICP0 inhibits the ability of IRF7 to trans -activate the IFN-β promoter ( 21 ). Furthermore, bICP27 inhibits the transcriptional activity of two bovine IFN-β gene promoters (IFN-β1 and IFN-β3) during transient transfection ( 22 ). However, no other protein of BoHV-1 has been reported to downregulate IFN-β signaling.

Since BoHV-1 VP8 is essential for viral replication in vivo , we examined its effect on the IFN signaling pathway. We determined that VP8 downregulates the IFN response both in VP8-transfected and in BoHV-1-infected cells. VP8 interacted with STAT1, and this interaction required two distinct domains of VP8. Furthermore, VP8 acted as an IFN antagonist by preventing nuclear translocation of STAT1.

DISCUSSION

In response to viral infection, cells establish an antiviral state through type I IFN signaling; however, many viruses have evolved unique mechanisms to evade this response. With this study, we demonstrated that VP8 of BoHV-1 plays an important biological function by downregulating IFN-induced responses. Transient expression of BoHV-1 VP8 inhibited IFN-β-induced transcriptional responses in transfected cells. Inhibition of IFN signaling was also observed in BoHV-1-infected cells, while BoHV1-ΔU L 47-infected cells showed partial recovery of IFN signaling compared to BoHV-1-infected cells. The presence of bICP0 and possibly bICP27 can also downregulate the IFN responses ( 20 – 22 ), which might explain the incomplete recovery of IFN signaling in BoHV1-ΔU L 47-infected cells. To test this, ActD was added during BoHV-1 infection, which prevented immediate early gene expression. In ActD-treated cells, downregulation of IFN signaling was observed in BoHV-1- or BoHV1-U L 47R-infected cells, but not in mock- or BoHV1-ΔU L 47-infected cells, which further confirmed the role of VP8 in downregulation of IFN signaling.

Despite some homology between the BoHV-1 and human herpesvirus 1 (HHV-1) U L 47 gene products, they differ in several respects. The HHV-1 U L 47 gene product, VP13/14, interacts with polyadenylate-binding protein (PABP) and disrupts the association of PABP with PABP-interacting protein 2 (Paip2) jointly with its binding partner, ICP27 ( 27 ). Since Paip2 remains in the cytoplasm, Dobrikova et al. ( 27 ) mentioned that it was unclear whether the Paip2 dissociation is a primary event that happens in the cytoplasm after HHV-1 infection. Shu et al. demonstrated that the HHV-1 UL47 interacts with vhs-RNase and attenuates the degradation of all kinetic classes of viral mRNA and thereby regulates the expression of β and γ genes by controlling the expression of α gene products ( 28 ). Thus far, these functions have not been investigated for BoHV-1 VP8. Liu et al. presented data suggesting that HHV-1 VP13/VP14 forms a complex with UL31, UL34, and US3, which are critical for viral nuclear egress, and plays a regulatory role in HHV-1 primary envelopment ( 29 ). However, deletion of BoHV-1 UL47 did not result in impaired nuclear egress ( 7 ). HHV-1 U L 47 (VP13/14) interacts with VP16 or alpha-transinducing factor (αTIF), and U L 47 -deleted HHV-1 demonstrated impaired ability to induce immediate early promoter-regulated expression of a reporter gene ( 30 , 31 ), but this effect was not observed for BoHV-1 VP8, as immediate early bICP4 mRNA transcripts were detected at similar levels in wild-type (WT), BoHV1-ΔU L 47, and BoHV1-U L 47R infected cells ( 7 ). In addition, when expressed in Escherichia coli or insect cells, HHV-1 VP13/14, but not BoHV-1 VP8, bound directly to RNA ( 32 ). In contrast, VP8 expressed in mammalian cells interacts with bICP0, gB, gC, and gD mRNAs ( 24 ).

We identified cellular STAT1 as an interacting partner of BoHV-1 VP8 in both VP8-transfected and BoHV-1 infected cells. The domains of VP8 that interact with STAT1 were found to be located in two different regions, VP8 259-482 and 632-686. BLAST sequence analysis of BoHV-1 VP8 demonstrated high homology of amino acids 280 to 735 with U L 47 -encoded proteins of human herpesvirus 1 and other herpesviruses and much less sequence similarity in the N-terminal region of amino acids 1 to 259 ( Fig. 3 ). Furthermore, the predicted secondary structure for amino acids 280 to 735 was mostly alpha-helical, a feature that has previously been implicated in protein-protein interactions ( 24 , 33 ). The crystal structure of STAT1 revealed that it has an alpha-helical coiled-coil domain starting at residue 130 and a DNA binding domain that is in the center of the STAT1 protein. The coiled-coil domain presents extensive possibilities for protein-protein interaction and, indeed, has been documented as interacting with other proteins (reviewed in reference 34 ). For example, although the rabies virus P protein binding site on STAT1 could not be precisely determined, the P protein-interacting domain resides in the coiled-coil and DNA binding domain of STAT1 ( 15 ). This suggests that the BoHV-1 VP8 binding site on STAT1 may be present on the coiled-coil or DNA-binding domain.

Viruses have evolved different mechanisms to antagonize the IFN signaling pathway through STAT1 or STAT2 interaction with viral proteins. For example, several paramyxovirus family members such as human parainfluenza virus 2 and SV5 induce polyubiquitination and degradation of STAT1 to block IFN signaling through the P and V proteins, respectively ( 35 ). The C protein of Sendai virus downregulates IFN signaling by inhibiting STAT1 phosphorylation and STAT1 degradation ( 36 ). The V protein of measles virus, also belonging to the Paramyxoviridae family, blocks IFN signaling by reducing STAT1 and STAT2 phosphorylation ( 37 ). In contrast, mumps virus V protein antagonizes IFN-induced antiviral effects by both degradation of STAT1 and prevention of nuclear translocation of STAT1 ( 19 ). Similarly, the V proteins of Nipah virus and Hendra virus, members of the Henipavirus genus, inhibit IFN-α/β and IFN-γ signaling by preventing both STAT1 phosphorylation and nuclear translocation ( 38 , 39 ). The P protein of rabies virus, belonging to the Rhabdoviridae , neither induces STAT1 degradation nor inhibits STAT1 phosphorylation but prevents STAT1 nuclear accumulation ( 15 ). The viral protein pM27 of mouse CMV (MCMV) inhibits IFN signaling by inducing proteasomal degradation of STAT2 ( 40 ). These examples show that viral proteins antagonize the IFN-induced host antiviral effects through the JAK-STAT signaling pathway in different ways.

VP8 is the first BoHV-1 protein identified as interacting with STAT1, thus contributing to prevention of IFN signaling. Although the expression of BoHV-1 VP8 inhibited IFN signaling, VP8 induced neither ubiquitination nor degradation or phosphorylation of STAT1. However, translocation of STAT1 to the nucleus following IFN-β treatment was inhibited by full-length VP8 as well as a truncated form of VP8, which contains the domains for interaction with STAT1. After exposure to IFN, ligand-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation and STAT1 dimerization take place, followed by the accumulation of STAT1s to the nucleus ( 41 ). The transport of the large protein complexes to the nucleus is facilitated by binding of importin-α with the nuclear localization signal (NLS) of STAT1 ( 42 ). Other residues in the coiled-coil domain are also responsible for nuclear import of some STAT proteins ( 43 ). A mutation in the STAT1 leucine residue at 407 (L407A) located in the DNA binding domain inhibited nuclear translocation of STAT1 ( 42 ). Similarly, McBridge et al. showed that STAT1 protein defective in DNA binding failed to accumulate in to the nucleus ( 42 ). The integrity of the DNA binding domain also determines nuclear retention of STAT1 ( 44 ). Since point mutations in the arginine- and lysine-rich residues in the DNA binding domain resulted in defective nuclear import of STAT1 ( 45 ), a lack of DNA binding is possibly associated with cytoplasmic retention of STAT1. Thus, an interaction between VP8 and the DNA binding domain or coiled-coil domain of STAT1 could impede the nuclear transport machinery as well as the DNA binding function. The NLS of VP8, amino acids 51 to 54 (RRPR), regulates nuclear localization of VP8 ( 46 ). A truncated version of VP8 consisting of amino acids 219 to 741, which lacks the NLS but contains two VP8-STAT1 interacting domains, was completely cytoplasmic and also able to retain STAT1 in the cytoplasm.

Accumulation of STAT1 to the nucleus was not observed in BoHV1- and BoHV1-U L 47R-infected cells, while BoHV1-ΔU L 47 allowed translocation of STAT1 to the nucleus. BoHV1 VP8 is the most abundant tegument protein of the virion. Previously, the full-length VP8 was observed in the cytoplasm as early as 2 h and was visualized in the nucleus at 5 h postinfection ( 9 ). Thus, interaction of VP8 with STAT1 in the cytoplasm might interfere with the nuclear import of STAT1 early after initiation of infection. We demonstrated that VP8 is present in the cytoplasm at 2 h postinfection, at which time STAT1 was retained in the cytoplasm. Since VP8 is a late protein, this suggests that viral VP8 released into the cytoplasm immediately after initiation of infection counteracts the establishment of an antiviral state by interacting with STAT1 to inhibit IFN signaling.

In summary, our data provide evidence that BoHV-1 VP8 inhibits IFN signaling early after initiation of infection in the absence of immediate early protein synthesis. Inhibition of IFN signaling appeared to occur through interference with nuclear translocation of STAT1 in both VP8-transfected and BoHV-1 infected cells. This is the first BoHV-1 protein shown to interact with cellular STAT1 to inhibit IFN-β signaling before the onset of virus replication. These results provide a new functional role for VP8 in BoHV-1 infection and a potential explanation for the lack of viral replication of the U L 47 deletion mutant in cattle.
