---
pmid: '9881977'
title: Direct suppression of Stat1 function during adenoviral infection.
authors:
- Look DC
- Roswit WT
- Frick AG
- Gris-Alevy Y
- Dickhaus DM
- Walter MJ
- Holtzman MJ
journal: Immunity
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1074-7613(00)80652-4
---

# Direct suppression of Stat1 function during adenoviral infection.
**Authors:** Look DC, Roswit WT, Frick AG, Gris-Alevy Y, Dickhaus DM, Walter MJ, Holtzman MJ
**Journal:** Immunity (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1074-7613(00)80652-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1074-7613(00)80652-4)

## Abstract

1. Immunity. 1998 Dec;9(6):871-80. doi: 10.1016/s1074-7613(00)80652-4.

Direct suppression of Stat1 function during adenoviral infection.

Look DC(1), Roswit WT, Frick AG, Gris-Alevy Y, Dickhaus DM, Walter MJ, Holtzman 
MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63110, USA.

The action of adenoviral E1A oncoprotein on host immune-response genes has been 
attributed to interaction with p300/CBP-type transcriptional coactivators in 
competition with endogenous transcription factors such as signal transducer and 
activator of transcription (STAT) proteins. However, we show that mutant forms 
of E1A that no longer bind p300/CBP can still interact directly with Stat1 (via 
E1A N-terminal and Stat1 C-terminal residues) and block IFNgamma-driven, 
Stat1-dependent gene activation and consequent function during early-phase 
infection in the natural host cell. The results provide a distinct and more 
specific mechanism for E1A-mediated immune suppression and an alternative model 
of IFNgamma-driven enhanceosome formation that may allow for other adaptors (in 
addition to p300/CBP) to link Stat1 to the basal transcription complex.

DOI: 10.1016/s1074-7613(00)80652-4
PMID: 9881977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
