---
pmid: '15657445'
title: A direct intersection between p53 and transforming growth factor beta pathways
  targets chromatin modification and transcription repression of the alpha-fetoprotein
  gene.
authors:
- Wilkinson DS
- Ogden SK
- Stratton SA
- Piechan JL
- Nguyen TT
- Smulian GA
- Barton MC
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC544019
doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.3.1200-1212.2005
---

# A direct intersection between p53 and transforming growth factor beta pathways targets chromatin modification and transcription repression of the alpha-fetoprotein gene.
**Authors:** Wilkinson DS, Ogden SK, Stratton SA, Piechan JL, Nguyen TT, Smulian GA, Barton MC
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.25.3.1200-1212.2005](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.25.3.1200-1212.2005)
**PMC:** [PMC544019](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC544019/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Feb;25(3):1200-12. doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.3.1200-1212.2005.

A direct intersection between p53 and transforming growth factor beta pathways 
targets chromatin modification and transcription repression of the 
alpha-fetoprotein gene.

Wilkinson DS(1), Ogden SK, Stratton SA, Piechan JL, Nguyen TT, Smulian GA, 
Barton MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas M.D. 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

We purified the oncoprotein SnoN and found that it functions as a corepressor of 
the tumor suppressor p53 in the regulation of the hepatic alpha-fetoprotein 
(AFP) tumor marker gene. p53 promotes SnoN and histone deacetylase interaction 
at an overlapping Smad binding, p53 regulatory element (SBE/p53RE) in AFP. 
Comparison of wild-type and p53-null mouse liver tissue by using chromatin 
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) reveals that the absence of p53 protein correlates 
with the disappearance of SnoN at the SBE/p53RE and loss of AFP developmental 
repression. Treatment of AFP-expressing hepatoma cells with transforming growth 
factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) induced SnoN transcription and Smad2 activation, 
concomitant with AFP repression. ChIP assays show that TGF-beta1 stimulates p53, 
Smad4, P-Smad2 binding, and histone H3K9 deacetylation and methylation, at the 
SBE/p53RE. Depletion, by small interfering RNA, of SnoN and/or p53 in hepatoma 
cells disrupted repression of AFP transcription. These findings support a model 
of cooperativity between p53 and TGF-beta effectors in chromatin modification 
and transcription repression of an oncodevelopmental tumor marker gene.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.25.3.1200-1212.2005
PMCID: PMC544019
PMID: 15657445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

We purified the oncoprotein SnoN and found that it functions as a corepressor of the tumor suppressor p53 in the regulation of the hepatic α -fetoprotein ( AFP ) tumor marker gene. p53 promotes SnoN and histone deacetylase interaction at an overlapping Smad binding, p53 regulatory element (SBE/p53RE) in AFP . Comparison of wild-type and p53-null mouse liver tissue by using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) reveals that the absence of p53 protein correlates with the disappearance of SnoN at the SBE/p53RE and loss of AFP developmental repression. Treatment of AFP -expressing hepatoma cells with transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) induced SnoN transcription and Smad2 activation, concomitant with AFP repression. ChIP assays show that TGF-β1 stimulates p53, Smad4, P-Smad2 binding, and histone H3K9 deacetylation and methylation, at the SBE/p53RE. Depletion, by small interfering RNA, of SnoN and/or p53 in hepatoma cells disrupted repression of AFP transcription. These findings support a model of cooperativity between p53 and TGF-β effectors in chromatin modification and transcription repression of an oncodevelopmental tumor marker gene.

DISCUSSION

We used affinity chromatography to purify a protein from normal liver and hepatoma cell extracts that interacts specifically with a defined p53 regulatory element, one that functions in transcription repression of the AFP gene during liver development. Once this protein was identified as the SnoN corepressor of the TGF-β pathway, we established that this association occurs in vivo and is p53 dependent by comparing normal and p53-null adult mouse liver tissue. We defined a mechanism for the observed downstream effects on chromatin structure and transcription regulation in vivo and in vitro using hepatoma cells. ChIP analyses revealed that SnoN interaction correlated with p53 binding of chromatin at a regulatory element composed of intercalated p53- and Smad-binding consensus sequences. Taken together, our data support a model of p53- and TGF-β-mediated alterations in protein complexes that interact with a composite SBE/p53RE and effect chromatin modification.

Database scanning for the consensus sequences of p53 and Smad protein binding sites revealed that they overlap to form a potential, composite p53/Smad regulatory element at more than 50 loci within the human genome (S. Zhao, personal communication). Using a compilation of p53 regulatory elements in a human p53 target gene database, Wang et al. found that 16 of 22 TGF-β-regulated genes contained p53 regulatory elements within their regulatory regions ( 84 ). Interestingly, in this work, global expression profiling of both p53-mediated activation and repression of gene transcription showed AFP as the most highly p53-repressed gene.

p53 can act as either a transcription activator or a transcription repressor depending on DNA sequence and/or cell specificity. Promotion of transcription repression, versus activation, by TGF-β signaling in concert with p53 may rely on action through an intercalated, composite regulatory element, as shown here, and tissue-specific expression of corepressor or activator complexes. Heteromeric interactions between Smad4, R-Smads, and conserved domains of Ski are sufficient for repression of Smad-dependent transcription of synthetic, SBE reporter constructs ( 81 ). The elegant studies of Piccolo and colleagues show that p53 and TGF-β cooperate in transcription activation of a specific subset of genes by binding to regulatory elements separated by more than 100 bp ( 20 ). They find that p53 binds its regulatory element in a transfected Mix.2 promoter in the absence of activin ligand, but both p53 and Smad binding are needed for full transcription activation. Activin did not induce activation of the p53 protein, but activated R-Smad (Smad2) exhibited protein-protein interactions with p53, which was purified by affinity for DNA lacking an SBE.

We found that the TGF-β ligand induces endogenous AFP chromatin association of both the p53 and Smad2/4 complexes, although the sequence of this process during embryonic development remains to be determined. HNF-3 (FoxA) is expressed early in development and is an important, endoderm-enriched activator of hepatic gene expression, including that of AFP ( 88 ). Winged-helix transcription factors, which include FoxA, can recruit active Smad protein complexes to their binding elements ( 30 ). FoxA binds to the 30-bp SBE/p53RE in the absence of p53 and is excluded from the protein-SBE/p53RE complex in the presence of p53 in vitro ( 42 ). Thus, Smad proteins interacting with FoxA and SBEs may play a role in AFP activation during embryogenesis prior to p53 activation, which occurs in postnatal mouse liver ( 42 ).

The ability of Smad4, P-Smad2, and corepressor SnoN to bind chromatin simultaneously is predicted from the crystal structure of Smad4 and Ski protein domains and in vitro protein-binding assays ( 87 ). Chromatin binding of p53 at the histone-acetylated SBE/p53RE region promotes the interaction of corepressor SnoN and HDAC complexes (and likely a histone methyltransferase), altering chromatin structure concomitantly with AFP repression. p53 may promote the binding of SnoN to the DNA-bound, Smad protein complex by direct protein-protein interactions with SnoN and/or by inducing a specific conformation of Smad proteins that exposes interactive surfaces for SnoN binding. Extrapolating from studies of Ski and Smad proteins, SnoN is likely to interact with Smad heteromeric complexes at multiple, potential binding surfaces ( 59 , 81 ).

There have been previous hints that the p53 and TGF-β pathways could somehow modify each other, although the majority of their downstream effects have been ascribed to independent functions. Mutation of p53 reduces the ability of TGF-β1 to inhibit growth of human bronchial epithelial cells ( 31 ) and to stimulate the growth of mesenchymal murine fibroblasts ( 27 ). TGF-β1 treatment of rat liver epithelial cells and immortalized human cervical cells induced apoptosis and/or cell cycle arrest, concomitant with p53 activation ( 61 , 76 ). HBx, the only transactivator protein encoded within the hepatitis B viral genome, can disrupt regulation of a subset of target genes in both TGF-β ( 68 ) and p53 signaling pathways ( 29 , 56 , 78 , 80 ). These links, which underscore the variety of p53 and TGF-β responses, have now been extended to growth control during development ( 20 ).

The biological consequences of the p53 and TGF-β pathways acting in synergy are likely influenced by a number of cis - and trans -acting modifiers. Cellular levels of TGF-β corepressor proteins, SnoN and Ski, are tightly controlled by multiple mechanisms. Overexpression leads to transformation of certain cell types ( 8 , 44 ; reviewed in reference 46 ), and decreased expression in mouse models leads to tumor formation ( 69 , 70 ). Transformation and tumor development in vivo may not only be promoted by dysfunction among direct regulators of TGF-β signaling but also amplified by loss of p53 cooperativity at a subset of target genes. The interplay between these two major tumor suppressor pathways, their function through chromatin modification, and potential cell-specific activities may prove significant in future assessment of transformation, tumor development, and treatment.
