---
pmid: '19073728'
title: ISG15 Arg151 and the ISG15-conjugating enzyme UbE1L are important for innate
  immune control of Sindbis virus.
authors:
- Giannakopoulos NV
- Arutyunova E
- Lai C
- Lenschow DJ
- Haas AL
- Virgin HW
journal: J Virol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2643764
doi: 10.1128/JVI.01590-08
---

# ISG15 Arg151 and the ISG15-conjugating enzyme UbE1L are important for innate immune control of Sindbis virus.
**Authors:** Giannakopoulos NV, Arutyunova E, Lai C, Lenschow DJ, Haas AL, Virgin HW
**Journal:** J Virol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.01590-08](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01590-08)
**PMC:** [PMC2643764](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2643764/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2009 Feb;83(4):1602-10. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01590-08. Epub 2008 Dec 10.

ISG15 Arg151 and the ISG15-conjugating enzyme UbE1L are important for innate 
immune control of Sindbis virus.

Giannakopoulos NV(1), Arutyunova E, Lai C, Lenschow DJ, Haas AL, Virgin HW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Interferon (IFN)-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15) is a ubiquitin-like molecule that 
conjugates to target proteins via a C-terminal LRLRGG motif and has antiviral 
function in vivo. We used structural modeling to predict human ISG15 (hISG15) 
residues important for interacting with its E1 enzyme, UbE1L. Kinetic analysis 
revealed that mutation of arginine 153 to alanine (R153A) ablated hISG15-hUbE1L 
binding and transthiolation of UbcH8. Mutation of other predicted 
UbE1L-interacting residues had minimal effects on the transfer of ISG15 from 
UbE1L to UbcH8. The capacity of hISG15 R153A to form protein conjugates in 293T 
cells was markedly diminished. Mutation of the homologous residue in mouse ISG15 
(mISG15), arginine 151, to alanine (R151A) also attenuated protein ISGylation 
following transfection into 293T cells. We assessed the role of ISG15-UbE1L 
interactions in control of virus infection by constructing double subgenomic 
Sindbis viruses that expressed the mISG15 R151A mutant. While expression of 
mISG15 protected alpha/beta-IFN-receptor-deficient (IFN-alphabetaR(-/-)) mice 
from lethality following Sindbis virus infection, expression of mISG15 R151A 
conferred no survival benefit. The R151A mutation also attenuated ISG15's 
ability to decrease Sindbis virus replication in IFN-alphabetaR(-/-) mice or 
prolong survival of ISG15(-/-) mice. The importance of UbE1L was confirmed by 
demonstrating that mice lacking this ISG15 E1 enzyme were highly susceptible to 
Sindbis virus infection. Together, these data support a role for protein 
conjugation in the antiviral effects of ISG15.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01590-08
PMCID: PMC2643764
PMID: 19073728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Interferon (IFN)-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15) is a ubiquitin-like molecule that conjugates to target proteins via a C-terminal LRLRGG motif and has antiviral function in vivo. We used structural modeling to predict human ISG15 (hISG15) residues important for interacting with its E1 enzyme, UbE1L. Kinetic analysis revealed that mutation of arginine 153 to alanine (R153A) ablated hISG15-hUbE1L binding and transthiolation of UbcH8. Mutation of other predicted UbE1L-interacting residues had minimal effects on the transfer of ISG15 from UbE1L to UbcH8. The capacity of hISG15 R153A to form protein conjugates in 293T cells was markedly diminished. Mutation of the homologous residue in mouse ISG15 (mISG15), arginine 151, to alanine (R151A) also attenuated protein ISGylation following transfection into 293T cells. We assessed the role of ISG15-UbE1L interactions in control of virus infection by constructing double subgenomic Sindbis viruses that expressed the mISG15 R151A mutant. While expression of mISG15 protected alpha/beta-IFN-receptor-deficient (IFN-αβR −/− ) mice from lethality following Sindbis virus infection, expression of mISG15 R151A conferred no survival benefit. The R151A mutation also attenuated ISG15's ability to decrease Sindbis virus replication in IFN-αβR −/− mice or prolong survival of ISG15 −/− mice. The importance of UbE1L was confirmed by demonstrating that mice lacking this ISG15 E1 enzyme were highly susceptible to Sindbis virus infection. Together, these data support a role for protein conjugation in the antiviral effects of ISG15.

DISCUSSION

To investigate the importance of the ISG15-UbE1L binding in ISG15's antiviral function, we performed alanine mutagenesis on ISG15 amino acids predicted to interact with UbE1L. In vitro kinetic analysis of hISG15 mutants suggested that arginine 153 was a critical residue in the UbE1L-ISG15 interaction, while mutation of other predicted UbE1L-interacting residues in ISG15 had a more modest effect on binding (Table 1 ). In cultured cells, mutation of hISG15 R153A greatly decreased protein ISGylation in a 293T cell conjugation system (Fig. 1A ), confirming the importance of ISG15-UbE1L binding for protein ISGylation.

To confirm that mutation of residues important for ISG15-UbE1L binding would disrupt ISG15's antiviral activity, we utilized a recombinant Sindbis virus system to express ISG15 in mice deficient in type I IFN signaling or ISG15 itself ( 24 , 25 ). As hISG15 has not been tested in this mouse system, we mutated the mISG15 residue analogous to hISG15 Arg153 (Fig. 1B ), allowing us to translate our kinetic analysis of the ISG15-UbE1L interaction into an in vivo antiviral function. Mutation of either hISG15 R153A or mISG15 R151A resulted in a significant diminution of protein ISGylation following transfection into 293T cells (Fig. 1 ). Additionally, transfection of mISG15 R151A into IFN-β-stimulated ISG15 −/− MEFs resulted in minimal protein ISGylation (Fig. 1E and F ). As all IFN-β-induced conjugation enzymes should be expressed under these conditions, these data confirm that mutation of mISG15 151A significantly impacts protein ISGylation even under potentially optimal conjugation conditions.

As expected from prior studies, mISG15 LRLRGG forms abundant conjugates in a 293T transfection system, protects IFN-αβR −/− and ISG15 −/− mice from lethality, and results in decreased viral titers in infected IFN-αβR −/− mice ( 24 ). Mutation of the terminal two glycines of mISG15 (mISG15 LRLRAA) abolishes protein conjugation and eliminates the capacity of ISG15 to protect from lethality during infection of IFN-αβR −/− and ISG15 −/− mice (Fig. 1 and 2 ) ( 24 , 25 ). It has previously been shown that Sindbis viruses expressing mISG15 LRLRAA grow to higher titers than do viruses expressing mISG15 in IFN-αβR −/− mice ( 24 ).

Infection of IFN-αβR −/− mice with Sindbis viruses expressing the mISG15 R151A mutation resulted in increased lethality and viral titer (Fig. 2 and 3 ). Additionally, mutation of mISG15 R151A resulted in increased lethality following infection of ISG15 −/− mice (Fig. 4 ), confirming that this residue is important for ISG15-mediated control of Sindbis virus infection. Data from our kinetic analysis (Table 1 ) demonstrated that hISG15 Arg153, the residue analogous to mISG15 Arg151, is critical for ISG15-UbE1L binding and that mutation of either hISG15 Arg153 or mISG15 Arg151 drastically impairs protein ISGylation (Fig. 1 ). As such, we hypothesize that by mutating mISG15 Arg151, we are disrupting the ISG15-UbE1L interaction and interfering with the ISG15-mediated control of Sindbis virus infection. As the last four amino acids (LRGG) of ISG15 are disordered and not visualized in the ISG15 crystal structure ( 33 ), it is unlikely that mutation of hISG15 R151/mISG15 R153 is inhibiting conjugation by altering the structure of the diglycine moiety. Additionally, we demonstrate that UbE1L is important for control of Sindbis virus infection, as mice deficient in UbE1L and protein ISGylation display increased sensitivity to Sindbis virus infection (Fig. 5 ). These data are consistent with the hypothesis that ISG15-UbE1L binding, mISG15 Arg151, and protein ISGylation are important components of ISG15's antiviral function.

ISG15 has been proposed to have both conjugation-dependent and conjugation-independent antiviral functions. Interestingly, infection of ISG15 −/− mice with recombinant Sindbis viruses expressing mISG15 R151A resulted in a small, but statistically significant, increase in survival compared to that with expression of mISG15 LRLRAA (Fig. 4 ), while infection of mice lacking type I IFN signaling showed no difference in survival from that of mice with type I IFN signaling (Fig. 2 ). This suggests that, in a system which lacks only ISG15 but retains other IFN-induced genes, mISG15 R151A contributes an antiviral activity not found in mISG15 LRLRAA.

In vivo conjugation in 293T cells and ISG15 −/− MEFs demonstrates that mISG15 R151A retains a small amount of residual conjugating activity (Fig. 1D and F ). One significant difference between ISG15 −/− and IFN-αβR −/− mice is the presence or absence of additional IFN-stimulated genes, including ISG15's E1, E2, and E3 enzymes. ISG15 mRNA expression can be induced in an IFN-αβ-independent manner ( 11 , 30 , 44 ). In contrast, ISG15 −/− mice should express all of the ISG15 conjugating machinery at levels approximating those in wild-type animals; in the presence of higher levels of conjugating enzymes in ISG15 −/− mice, any residual conjugating ability of mISG15 R151A could be amplified and result in increased survival. The increase in survival seen in ISG15 −/− mice suggests that the small number of residual conjugates formed by mISG15 R151A (Fig. 1 ) could have significant physiologic importance.

Alternatively, the difference in lethality could reflect additional, non-conjugation-dependent functions of mISG15 found in mISG15 R151A but not mISG15 LRLRAA. Recent data have demonstrated that intracellular expression of free ISG15 can inhibit budding of Ebola virus VP40 VLPs by interacting with the Nedd4 ubiquitin ligase and inhibiting the ubiquitination of VP40 ( 29 , 35 ). While expression of ISG15's conjugating enzymes was not required for the antiviral activity of ISG15 in these systems, the molecular determinants of ISG15 required were not determined. Additionally, it has previously been reported that the extracellular cytokine function of hISG15 requires exposure of the terminal two glycine residues ( 5 ). In our constructs, the terminal two diglycine residues are mutated in mISG15 LRLRAA but not mISG15 R151A (LALRGG).

We have demonstrated that mISG15 Arg151 is critical for protein conjugation and that mISG15 Arg151 and UbE1L play an important role in the control of Sindbis virus infection by ISG15. In the face of overwhelming immunocompromise in IFN-αβR −/− mice, protein ISGylation contributes the majority of ISG15's antiviral effect, with the contribution of a small amount of conjugates or an additional, conjugation-independent antiviral activity being minimal. These data confirm previous observations that conjugation-deficient forms of ISG15 are impaired in their antiviral activity and demonstrate that mISG15 Arg151 is a critical residue in ISG15's antiviral function.
