---
pmid: '28890335'
title: The ER-Localized Transmembrane Protein EPG-3/VMP1 Regulates SERCA Activity
  to Control ER-Isolation Membrane Contacts for Autophagosome Formation.
authors:
- Zhao YG
- Chen Y
- Miao G
- Zhao H
- Qu W
- Li D
- Wang Z
- Liu N
- Li L
- Chen S
- Liu P
- Feng D
- Zhang H
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC12275124
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.08.005
---

# The ER-Localized Transmembrane Protein EPG-3/VMP1 Regulates SERCA Activity to Control ER-Isolation Membrane Contacts for Autophagosome Formation.
**Authors:** Zhao YG, Chen Y, Miao G, Zhao H, Qu W, Li D, Wang Z, Liu N, Li L, Chen S, Liu P, Feng D, Zhang H
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2017.08.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2017.08.005)
**PMC:** [PMC12275124](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12275124/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2017 Sep 21;67(6):974-989.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.08.005.
Epub  2017 Sep 7.

The ER-Localized Transmembrane Protein EPG-3/VMP1 Regulates SERCA Activity to 
Control ER-Isolation Membrane Contacts for Autophagosome Formation.

Zhao YG(1), Chen Y(1), Miao G(1), Zhao H(1), Qu W(1), Li D(1), Wang Z(1), Liu 
N(1), Li L(2), Chen S(2), Liu P(1), Feng D(3), Zhang H(4).

Author information:
(1)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in 
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, P.R. China.
(2)National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing 102206, P.R. China.
(3)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 
511436, P.R. China.
(4)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in 
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, P.R. China; College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing 100049, P.R. China. Electronic address: hongzhang@ibp.ac.cn.

During autophagosome formation in mammalian cells, isolation membranes (IMs; 
autophagosome precursors) dynamically contact the ER. Here, we demonstrated that 
the ER-localized metazoan-specific autophagy protein EPG-3/VMP1 controls ER-IM 
contacts. Loss of VMP1 causes stable association of IMs with the ER, thus 
blocking autophagosome formation. Interaction of WIPI2 with the ULK1/FIP200 
complex and PI(3)P contributes to the formation of ER-IM contacts, and these 
interactions are enhanced by VMP1 depletion. VMP1 controls contact formation by 
promoting SERCA (sarco[endo]plasmic reticulum calcium ATPase) activity. VMP1 
interacts with SERCA and prevents formation of the SERCA/PLN/SLN inhibitory 
complex. VMP1 also modulates ER contacts with lipid droplets, mitochondria, and 
endosomes. These ER contacts are greatly elevated by the SERCA inhibitor 
thapsigargin. Calmodulin acts as a sensor/effector to modulate the ER contacts 
mediated by VMP1/SERCA. Our study provides mechanistic insights into the 
establishment and disassociation of ER-IM contacts and reveals that VMP1 
modulates SERCA activity to control ER contacts.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.08.005
PMID: 28890335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Macroautophagy, hereafter referred to as autophagy, is a fundamental process in eukaryotic cells that maintains homeostasis by degrading unnecessary or damaged cellular components. Dysfunction of autophagy is implicated in numerous human diseases, including cancer, inflammatory diseases, neurodegenerative disorders, and infections caused by viruses and bacteria (1, 2). Targeting the autophagy pathway has been recognized as a potential therapeutic strategy for a wide range of conditions (3, 4), including Parkinson’s disease (5).

Autophagy is classified into two types based on substrate selectivity: bulk (non-selective) autophagy and selective autophagy. Bulk autophagy, commonly triggered by nutrient deprivation, is regulated by key signaling pathways including the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) and AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) (6, 7). This type of autophagy involves the degradation of cytoplasmic components, which are recycled in the lysosome into the building blocks of macromolecular synthesis. In contrast, selective autophagy targets specific substrates, such as protein aggregates (referred to as aggrephagy), mitochondria (mitophagy), lysosomes (lysophagy), the endoplasmic reticulum (ER-phagy), the Golgi (golgiphagy), nuclear pore complexes (NPC-phagy), peroxisomes (pexophagy), and intracellular pathogens (xenophagy) (8). Both forms of autophagy initiate with the de novo formation of a phagophore, also known as the isolation membrane—a double-membrane structure that sequesters the cargo (9, 10, 11, 12). Selective autophagy often begins with the ubiquitylation of cargo, which is subsequently recognized by ubiquitin-binding cargo receptors such as p62/SQSTM1, TAX1BP1, NDP52, NBR1, and OPTN (13, 14). These cargo receptors perform two main functions, (i) recruiting the autophagy machinery to the phagophore assembly site and initiating phagophore formation (Fig. 1A), and (ii) linking the cargo to phagophore through interactions with LC3/GABARAP proteins by their LC3-interaction region (LIR) motifs (15, 16, 17) (Fig. 1B).Figure 1Overview of autophagosome formation in selective autophagy. A, initiation of phagophore formation. Selective autophagy cargos, such as protein aggregates, are first ubiquitinated and then recognized by specific cargo receptors. These cargo receptors subsequently recruit ULK1C, which in turn interacts with and activates PI3KC3-C1. PI3KC3-C1 produces PI(3)P on autophagy-associated membranes. B, phagophore expansion. PI(3)P recruits WIPI proteins, which facilitate the following recruitment of ATG2 and E3 complex. ATG2 transports lipids from donor organelles such as the ER, promoting phagophore expansion in collaboration with ATG9. Meanwhile, the E3 complex mediates the conjugation of LC3 proteins to the phagophore membrane, a process known as LC3 lipidation. Interactions between LC3 proteins and cargo receptors keep the phagophore growing around the cargo. After closure (also a critical step yet out of the scope of this review), the mature autophagosome is formed and subsequently fused with lysosomes for cargo degradation.

Overview of autophagosome formation in selective autophagy. A, initiation of phagophore formation. Selective autophagy cargos, such as protein aggregates, are first ubiquitinated and then recognized by specific cargo receptors. These cargo receptors subsequently recruit ULK1C, which in turn interacts with and activates PI3KC3-C1. PI3KC3-C1 produces PI(3)P on autophagy-associated membranes. B, phagophore expansion. PI(3)P recruits WIPI proteins, which facilitate the following recruitment of ATG2 and E3 complex. ATG2 transports lipids from donor organelles such as the ER, promoting phagophore expansion in collaboration with ATG9. Meanwhile, the E3 complex mediates the conjugation of LC3 proteins to the phagophore membrane, a process known as LC3 lipidation. Interactions between LC3 proteins and cargo receptors keep the phagophore growing around the cargo. After closure (also a critical step yet out of the scope of this review), the mature autophagosome is formed and subsequently fused with lysosomes for cargo degradation.

The unc-51-like kinase complex (ULK1C) is usually, but not always (18), the most upstream-acting of the core complexes, and responds to a variety of signals from both bulk and selective autophagy pathways. ULK1C transmits these signals by recruiting and activating downstream autophagy machinery (10, 19, 20) including the class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase complex I (PI3KC3-C1) (Fig. 1A). The primary function of PI3KC3-C1 is to produce phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate (PI(3)P), which is a critical messenger in the autophagy signaling cascade that recruits effector WD repeat proteins interacting with phosphoinositides (WIPIs). WIPI proteins, in turn recruit two other autophagy core complexes: the ATG12-ATG5-ATG16L1 (E3) complex and ATG2A. The ATG12-ATG5-ATG16L1 has a ubiquitin E3-like activity in promoting ATG8 family protein conjugation to the membrane lipid phosphatidyl-ethanolamine (PE) and is often referred to as the “E3” in this context (Fig. 1B). Formation of the E3 complex is dependent on an ATG12-ATG5 conjugation reaction catalyzed by the ATG7 (E1-like) and ATG10 (E2-like) proteins. Meanwhile, ATG2A establishes contact sites between phagophores and the membrane sources, such as the ER, facilitating lipid transfer to the expanding phagophore (21, 22, 23) (Fig. 1B). The final autophagy core protein, ATG9A, acts as a scramblase within the phagophore membrane, balancing lipid distribution across the outer and inner leaflets downstream of ATG2A (24, 25, 26, 27, 28). Vesicles containing ATG9A, known as ATG9 vesicles, are proposed to serve as the initial seeds for phagophore formation (10, 29) (Fig. 1A).

In this review, we highlight recent advances in understanding the first two core complexes, ULK1C and PI3KC3-C1. The latest molecular studies on the structure, assembly, coordination, and activation of these complexes shed light on the mechanism underlying phagophore formation. These findings offer a detailed view of their regulation in atomistic detail and suggest concepts for their therapeutic targeting in the future.

Overview of the ULK1 complexThe ULK1C is composed of four subunits: the serine/threonine protein kinase ULK1, the scaffold protein focal adhesion kinase family interacting protein of 200 kDa (FIP200), and the regulatory proteins autophagy-related protein 13 (ATG13) and 101 (ATG101) (Fig. 2A) (30, 31, 32, 33, 34). ULK1 is the catalytic subunit of the complex and comprises an N-terminal kinase domain (KD, residues 1–278), a long serine-proline-rich region (279–827), and a C-terminal tandem microtubule-interacting and transport (MIT) domain (828–1050), also sometimes referred to as the early autophagy tethering/targeting (EAT) domain (35). The N-terminal domain of ULK1 adopts a typical kinase structure but features a non-conserved regulatory loop, possessing an autophosphorylation site at Thr180 which is crucial for the autophagy activity (36). At the other end of ULK1, the C-terminal tandem MIT domain is responsible for interacting with other two ULK1C subunits FIP200 and ATG13 (37, 38). FIP200 consists of an N-terminal scaffold domain (NTD) (1–640) which contains within it an ubiquitin-like domain (ULD) (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80), an intrinsically disordered region (IDR, residues 641–790), a long coiled-coil (CC) domain (791–1497), and a C-terminal Claw domain (1498–1594). FIP200 forms a long, flexible homodimer that plays a central role in complex formation and interacts with various autophagy-related proteins (39). The remaining two subunits, ATG13 and ATG101, are primarily Hop1/Rev7/Mad2 (HORMA) proteins (40, 41). The N-terminal region of ATG13 (1–190) and the entire ATG101 (1–218) form a heteromeric HORMA dimer. This dimer connects to the core of ULK1C via an intrinsically disordered region (IDR) (191–460) and the C-terminal MIM motif (461–517) motif of ATG13 (38).Figure 2Overall structure of ULK1C. A, schematic representations for the subunits of ULK1C, with domains and their corresponding residue ranges indicated. B, schematic diagram of the overall structure of ULK1C, with each region shown to scale. The estimated contour lengths of the coiled-coil and IDRs are indicated. C, overview of the ULK1C generated from experimentally determined structures: core (PDB ID: 8SOI), ULK1 kinase domain (PDB ID: 4WNP), ATG13:ATG101 HORMA domain (PDB ID: 5C50), FIP200 C-terminal region (PDB ID: 6GMA). Domains and their interacting proteins are labeled.ULK1C is organized around a three-subunit core, which contains only a fraction of its total molecular mass. Three peripheral regions project from this core, each connected by a flexible linker (Fig. 2, B and C). The core region represents the largest ordered structure of the complex, consisting of FIP200NTD, ULK1MIT, and ATG13MIM. The FIP200NTD forms a C-shaped homodimer, serving as a scaffold for recruiting the ULK1MIT: ATG13MIM heterodimer via its ‘shoulder’ region. Basally, the ULK1C core has a 2:1:1 FIP200:ULK1:ATG13 stoichiometry (37, 38), in which the ATG13IDR interacts extensively with both protomers of FIP200NTD through two independent binding sites (ATG13392-408 and ATG13450-460). Truncations or mutations of these ATG13 IDR regions can change the subunit stoichiometry of the complex to 2:2:2 (38). The potential physiological implications of the core complex stoichiometry conversion will be discussed below. The peripheral regions of ULK1C include the ULKKD, the FIP200Claw, and the ATG13/101 HORMA dimer, which are linked to the core region through long coiled-coil or IDRs (Fig. 2B). The overall flexibility of ULK1C allows it to efficiently connect cargos and interact with the rest of the autophagy machinery over extended distances.

Overview of the ULK1 complex

The ULK1C is composed of four subunits: the serine/threonine protein kinase ULK1, the scaffold protein focal adhesion kinase family interacting protein of 200 kDa (FIP200), and the regulatory proteins autophagy-related protein 13 (ATG13) and 101 (ATG101) (Fig. 2A) (30, 31, 32, 33, 34). ULK1 is the catalytic subunit of the complex and comprises an N-terminal kinase domain (KD, residues 1–278), a long serine-proline-rich region (279–827), and a C-terminal tandem microtubule-interacting and transport (MIT) domain (828–1050), also sometimes referred to as the early autophagy tethering/targeting (EAT) domain (35). The N-terminal domain of ULK1 adopts a typical kinase structure but features a non-conserved regulatory loop, possessing an autophosphorylation site at Thr180 which is crucial for the autophagy activity (36). At the other end of ULK1, the C-terminal tandem MIT domain is responsible for interacting with other two ULK1C subunits FIP200 and ATG13 (37, 38). FIP200 consists of an N-terminal scaffold domain (NTD) (1–640) which contains within it an ubiquitin-like domain (ULD) (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80), an intrinsically disordered region (IDR, residues 641–790), a long coiled-coil (CC) domain (791–1497), and a C-terminal Claw domain (1498–1594). FIP200 forms a long, flexible homodimer that plays a central role in complex formation and interacts with various autophagy-related proteins (39). The remaining two subunits, ATG13 and ATG101, are primarily Hop1/Rev7/Mad2 (HORMA) proteins (40, 41). The N-terminal region of ATG13 (1–190) and the entire ATG101 (1–218) form a heteromeric HORMA dimer. This dimer connects to the core of ULK1C via an intrinsically disordered region (IDR) (191–460) and the C-terminal MIM motif (461–517) motif of ATG13 (38).Figure 2Overall structure of ULK1C. A, schematic representations for the subunits of ULK1C, with domains and their corresponding residue ranges indicated. B, schematic diagram of the overall structure of ULK1C, with each region shown to scale. The estimated contour lengths of the coiled-coil and IDRs are indicated. C, overview of the ULK1C generated from experimentally determined structures: core (PDB ID: 8SOI), ULK1 kinase domain (PDB ID: 4WNP), ATG13:ATG101 HORMA domain (PDB ID: 5C50), FIP200 C-terminal region (PDB ID: 6GMA). Domains and their interacting proteins are labeled.

Overall structure of ULK1C. A, schematic representations for the subunits of ULK1C, with domains and their corresponding residue ranges indicated. B, schematic diagram of the overall structure of ULK1C, with each region shown to scale. The estimated contour lengths of the coiled-coil and IDRs are indicated. C, overview of the ULK1C generated from experimentally determined structures: core (PDB ID: 8SOI), ULK1 kinase domain (PDB ID: 4WNP), ATG13:ATG101 HORMA domain (PDB ID: 5C50), FIP200 C-terminal region (PDB ID: 6GMA). Domains and their interacting proteins are labeled.

ULK1C is organized around a three-subunit core, which contains only a fraction of its total molecular mass. Three peripheral regions project from this core, each connected by a flexible linker (Fig. 2, B and C). The core region represents the largest ordered structure of the complex, consisting of FIP200NTD, ULK1MIT, and ATG13MIM. The FIP200NTD forms a C-shaped homodimer, serving as a scaffold for recruiting the ULK1MIT: ATG13MIM heterodimer via its ‘shoulder’ region. Basally, the ULK1C core has a 2:1:1 FIP200:ULK1:ATG13 stoichiometry (37, 38), in which the ATG13IDR interacts extensively with both protomers of FIP200NTD through two independent binding sites (ATG13392-408 and ATG13450-460). Truncations or mutations of these ATG13 IDR regions can change the subunit stoichiometry of the complex to 2:2:2 (38). The potential physiological implications of the core complex stoichiometry conversion will be discussed below. The peripheral regions of ULK1C include the ULKKD, the FIP200Claw, and the ATG13/101 HORMA dimer, which are linked to the core region through long coiled-coil or IDRs (Fig. 2B). The overall flexibility of ULK1C allows it to efficiently connect cargos and interact with the rest of the autophagy machinery over extended distances.

FIP200 as an interaction hubA key function of ULK1C is the recognition of cargo receptors, which triggers the initiation of selective autophagy (Fig. 2C, left). This role is, in most cases, attributable to the extreme C-terminal region of FIP200. The cargo receptor p62 recruits FIP200 through direct interaction with its claw domain (42), while another aggrephagy receptor, TAX1BP1, binds to both the CC and the claw domains of FIP200 (43, 44). Other cargo receptors, such as NBR1, also directly bind to FIP200 and enhance p62-mediated autophagy, although their specific binding sites on FIP200 remain to be identified (45, 46). The mitophagy and xenophagy receptor NDP52 interacts with both the FIP200CC (1363–1381) and the FIP200claw (47, 48). Moreover, the ER-phagy receptor CCPG1 and the mitophagy receptor OPTN engage FIP200 through the claw domain (49, 50). Besides cargo receptors, FIP200 also interacts with TNIP, a mitophagy regulator, via its claw domain (51, 52). While the FIP200 C-terminal region contains most of the documented cargo receptor binding sites, an alternative linkage has been reported for the mitophagy receptors BNIP3, NIX, and FKBP8 and the ER-phagy receptor TEX264. These receptors bind directly to WIPI2, which in turn recruits ULK1C through its ATG13 subunit (53).In addition to the cargo receptors, FIP200 also interacts with various downstream autophagy proteins (Fig. 2C, right bottom). Among these, PI3KC3-C1 is the most crucial target of ULK1C, and their interaction is primarily mediated through FIP200 (38). FIP200 directly binds to ATG16L1 (54, 55), which is regulated by the phosphorylation of FIP200 and is critical for mitophagy (56). Moreover, FIP200 facilitates the ER-phagophore contact formation by binding to WIPI2, suggesting a positive feedback mechanism in autophagy initiation (57). Beyond direct cargo receptor interactions, FIP200 contributes to autophagy in various other ways: has been reported to interact with the ALS/FTD gene product C9orf72 (58), although the site of the interaction has not been defined, and reported to interact with WIPI3/TSC1 to regulate mTORC1 (59, 60), and associates with MOSPD2/VAPA/VAPB for localization to the autophagosome-ER contact site (61, 62). These interactions underscore the versatile function of FIP200 as an interaction hub in autophagy signaling, coordinating multiple pathways and processes essential for autophagy regulation.The membrane association of FIP200 is a crucial event in autophagy initiation. Ectopic recruitment of FIP200 to mitochondria or peroxisomes results in the degradation of these organelles, bypassing the need for their endogenous receptors (47). This observation suggests that an increase in the local concentration of FIP200 is sufficient to induce autophagy. It has also been demonstrated that calcium transients trigger the condensate formation of FIP200 on ER in a ATG13-dependent manner, driving their assembly into phagophore assembly site (63). Neither FIP200 nor other subunits of ULK1C are known to be Ca2+-binding proteins, nor do they contain known Ca2+-binding motifs. It seems more likely this effect is mediated by Ca2+-regulated protein kinases (64). FIP200 can directly bind to membranes in a manner promoted by binding to the cargo receptor NDP52. NDP52 binding promotes a more dynamic conformation of FIP200CC (790–1050), enhancing its membrane binding (39) (Fig. 2C, right top).

FIP200 as an interaction hub

A key function of ULK1C is the recognition of cargo receptors, which triggers the initiation of selective autophagy (Fig. 2C, left). This role is, in most cases, attributable to the extreme C-terminal region of FIP200. The cargo receptor p62 recruits FIP200 through direct interaction with its claw domain (42), while another aggrephagy receptor, TAX1BP1, binds to both the CC and the claw domains of FIP200 (43, 44). Other cargo receptors, such as NBR1, also directly bind to FIP200 and enhance p62-mediated autophagy, although their specific binding sites on FIP200 remain to be identified (45, 46). The mitophagy and xenophagy receptor NDP52 interacts with both the FIP200CC (1363–1381) and the FIP200claw (47, 48). Moreover, the ER-phagy receptor CCPG1 and the mitophagy receptor OPTN engage FIP200 through the claw domain (49, 50). Besides cargo receptors, FIP200 also interacts with TNIP, a mitophagy regulator, via its claw domain (51, 52). While the FIP200 C-terminal region contains most of the documented cargo receptor binding sites, an alternative linkage has been reported for the mitophagy receptors BNIP3, NIX, and FKBP8 and the ER-phagy receptor TEX264. These receptors bind directly to WIPI2, which in turn recruits ULK1C through its ATG13 subunit (53).

In addition to the cargo receptors, FIP200 also interacts with various downstream autophagy proteins (Fig. 2C, right bottom). Among these, PI3KC3-C1 is the most crucial target of ULK1C, and their interaction is primarily mediated through FIP200 (38). FIP200 directly binds to ATG16L1 (54, 55), which is regulated by the phosphorylation of FIP200 and is critical for mitophagy (56). Moreover, FIP200 facilitates the ER-phagophore contact formation by binding to WIPI2, suggesting a positive feedback mechanism in autophagy initiation (57). Beyond direct cargo receptor interactions, FIP200 contributes to autophagy in various other ways: has been reported to interact with the ALS/FTD gene product C9orf72 (58), although the site of the interaction has not been defined, and reported to interact with WIPI3/TSC1 to regulate mTORC1 (59, 60), and associates with MOSPD2/VAPA/VAPB for localization to the autophagosome-ER contact site (61, 62). These interactions underscore the versatile function of FIP200 as an interaction hub in autophagy signaling, coordinating multiple pathways and processes essential for autophagy regulation.

The membrane association of FIP200 is a crucial event in autophagy initiation. Ectopic recruitment of FIP200 to mitochondria or peroxisomes results in the degradation of these organelles, bypassing the need for their endogenous receptors (47). This observation suggests that an increase in the local concentration of FIP200 is sufficient to induce autophagy. It has also been demonstrated that calcium transients trigger the condensate formation of FIP200 on ER in a ATG13-dependent manner, driving their assembly into phagophore assembly site (63). Neither FIP200 nor other subunits of ULK1C are known to be Ca2+-binding proteins, nor do they contain known Ca2+-binding motifs. It seems more likely this effect is mediated by Ca2+-regulated protein kinases (64). FIP200 can directly bind to membranes in a manner promoted by binding to the cargo receptor NDP52. NDP52 binding promotes a more dynamic conformation of FIP200CC (790–1050), enhancing its membrane binding (39) (Fig. 2C, right top).

ATG13:ATG101 HORMA heterodimerThe ATG13:ATG101 HORMA dimer is a distinct and characteristic component of ULK1C. ATG13 is conserved across eukaryotes, whereas ATG101 is absent in budding yeasts (31, 33). ATG101 contains only a HORMA domain and features a Trp-Phe (WF) finger motif, which is essential for autophagy but whose precise function and partner(s) are unknown (40, 41). ATG101 binds to the N-terminal HORMA domain of ATG13, which is connected to the ULK1C core via the IDR (37). The interaction between ATG13 and ATG101 is essential for autophagy (65). The HORMA domain is known for its unusual ability to switch between two different folds via a conformational change in its “seatbelt” region (66). It was proposed that the ATG13 and ATG101 HORMA domains can regulate autophagy by switching folds (67); however, this occurs on a time scale of many hours, far longer than the ∼2 min needed for autophagy initiation. As yet, neither experimental nor predictive structural evidence for this type of switching in the ATG13 and ATG101 context has been reported; thus, the concept of HORMA fold switching in autophagy must be considered speculative. On the other hand, high-resolution crystallography showed that a groove formed at the interface between the ATG13 and ATG101 HORMA domains binds to the C-terminal region of ATG9A (68). ATG9A C-terminal tail binding to the HORMA dimer is important, but not strictly required, for bulk autophagy and NDP52-dependent mitophagy (68).

ATG13:ATG101 HORMA heterodimer

The ATG13:ATG101 HORMA dimer is a distinct and characteristic component of ULK1C. ATG13 is conserved across eukaryotes, whereas ATG101 is absent in budding yeasts (31, 33). ATG101 contains only a HORMA domain and features a Trp-Phe (WF) finger motif, which is essential for autophagy but whose precise function and partner(s) are unknown (40, 41). ATG101 binds to the N-terminal HORMA domain of ATG13, which is connected to the ULK1C core via the IDR (37). The interaction between ATG13 and ATG101 is essential for autophagy (65). The HORMA domain is known for its unusual ability to switch between two different folds via a conformational change in its “seatbelt” region (66). It was proposed that the ATG13 and ATG101 HORMA domains can regulate autophagy by switching folds (67); however, this occurs on a time scale of many hours, far longer than the ∼2 min needed for autophagy initiation. As yet, neither experimental nor predictive structural evidence for this type of switching in the ATG13 and ATG101 context has been reported; thus, the concept of HORMA fold switching in autophagy must be considered speculative. On the other hand, high-resolution crystallography showed that a groove formed at the interface between the ATG13 and ATG101 HORMA domains binds to the C-terminal region of ATG9A (68). ATG9A C-terminal tail binding to the HORMA dimer is important, but not strictly required, for bulk autophagy and NDP52-dependent mitophagy (68).

Regulation and activation of ULK1 kinaseULK1 is the pivotal kinase in the autophagy initiation pathway, of which one primary substrate is ULK1 itself (36, 69) and the other three subunits of ULK1C (70, 71). ULK1 has many non-autophagic functions, which have been well-reviewed elsewhere and so will not be described further here (72). ULK1 phosphorylates PI3KC3-C1 (70, 73, 74) and its regulator AMBRA1 (70, 75), along with other autophagy-related proteins including the lipid scramblase ATG9A (76), the cysteine protease and LC3 deconjugase ATG4 (77), and others (20, 72). Meanwhile, ULK1 is also a phosphorylation target of upstream kinases such as mTORC1 (6), AMPK (6, 78, 79), and TIP60 (80). Under nutrient-rich conditions, ULK1 is inhibited by mTORC1, which phosphorylates key regulatory sites on ULK1 and ATG13, maintaining them in an inactive state (6, 81). In starvation conditions, these sites undergo rapid dephosphorylation, leading to the activation of ULK1 (30, 32). Remarkably, active ULK1 can phosphorylate and inhibit mTORC (82, 83), indicating a complex regulatory network involving feedback loops within nutrient-sensing signaling (7). The great majority of ULK1C phosphorylation sites are located within IDRs, such that to date, the structural mechanisms of phosphoregulation have yet to be explained.Autophosphorylation is a critical step in ULK1 activation (36), though its molecular basis has been elusive. Recent findings propose a dimerization-induced activation mechanism of ULK1, based on the observed stoichiometry shift of FIP200:ULK1:ATG13 from 2:1:1 to 2:2:2. This mechanism parallels the well-known paradigm observed in receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) (84), and many other kinases, in which dimerization triggers autophosphorylation and activation (Fig. 3). This is consistent with the observation that artificially induced dimerization of Atg1, the yeast homologue of ULK1, promotes its activation (85). Multiple factors can drive this stoichiometry shift, including disruption of the interaction between ATG13IDR and FIP200, increased concentration of ULK1C, and the presence of PI3KC3-C1. It is proposed that PI3KC3-C1 promotes the dimerization of ULK1C in part by increasing its local concentration at the phagophore assembly site, thereby facilitating its autophosphorylation and activation (38). Moreover, the N-termini of the BECN1 and ATG14 subunits of PI3KC3-C1 (see below) are positioned near the autoinhibitory ATG13IDR binding sites of FIP200 (86), suggesting a potential regulatory role in this region.Figure 3Model of ULK1C activation. Schematic diagram illustrating the activation process of ULK1C. In the inactive state, the ULK1C core forms a FIP200:ULK1:ATG13 complex with a 2:1:1 stoichiometry, where the ATG13IDR extensively interacts with the FIP200arm (sites #1–3), preventing the binding of a second ULK1:ATG13 subdimer (left). Alteration of stoichiometry can be induced by (i) increased local concentration or (ii) presence of PI3KC3-C1, which disrupts the ATG13:FIP200 interaction and facilitates the recruitment of the second ULK1:ATG13 subdimer to the core. This results in the formation of a 2:2:2 complex, enhancing the autophosphorylation of ULK1 (right).In addition, ULK1 is directly anchored to the autophagosome formation site through palmitoylation of Cys927 and Cys1003 on the MIT domain. Depletion of the palmitoyl transferase ZDHHC13 impairs the recruitment of ULK1C and reduces the phosphorylation of ATG14, underscoring its role in the early steps of autophagy initiation (87).

Regulation and activation of ULK1 kinase

ULK1 is the pivotal kinase in the autophagy initiation pathway, of which one primary substrate is ULK1 itself (36, 69) and the other three subunits of ULK1C (70, 71). ULK1 has many non-autophagic functions, which have been well-reviewed elsewhere and so will not be described further here (72). ULK1 phosphorylates PI3KC3-C1 (70, 73, 74) and its regulator AMBRA1 (70, 75), along with other autophagy-related proteins including the lipid scramblase ATG9A (76), the cysteine protease and LC3 deconjugase ATG4 (77), and others (20, 72). Meanwhile, ULK1 is also a phosphorylation target of upstream kinases such as mTORC1 (6), AMPK (6, 78, 79), and TIP60 (80). Under nutrient-rich conditions, ULK1 is inhibited by mTORC1, which phosphorylates key regulatory sites on ULK1 and ATG13, maintaining them in an inactive state (6, 81). In starvation conditions, these sites undergo rapid dephosphorylation, leading to the activation of ULK1 (30, 32). Remarkably, active ULK1 can phosphorylate and inhibit mTORC (82, 83), indicating a complex regulatory network involving feedback loops within nutrient-sensing signaling (7). The great majority of ULK1C phosphorylation sites are located within IDRs, such that to date, the structural mechanisms of phosphoregulation have yet to be explained.

Autophosphorylation is a critical step in ULK1 activation (36), though its molecular basis has been elusive. Recent findings propose a dimerization-induced activation mechanism of ULK1, based on the observed stoichiometry shift of FIP200:ULK1:ATG13 from 2:1:1 to 2:2:2. This mechanism parallels the well-known paradigm observed in receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) (84), and many other kinases, in which dimerization triggers autophosphorylation and activation (Fig. 3). This is consistent with the observation that artificially induced dimerization of Atg1, the yeast homologue of ULK1, promotes its activation (85). Multiple factors can drive this stoichiometry shift, including disruption of the interaction between ATG13IDR and FIP200, increased concentration of ULK1C, and the presence of PI3KC3-C1. It is proposed that PI3KC3-C1 promotes the dimerization of ULK1C in part by increasing its local concentration at the phagophore assembly site, thereby facilitating its autophosphorylation and activation (38). Moreover, the N-termini of the BECN1 and ATG14 subunits of PI3KC3-C1 (see below) are positioned near the autoinhibitory ATG13IDR binding sites of FIP200 (86), suggesting a potential regulatory role in this region.Figure 3Model of ULK1C activation. Schematic diagram illustrating the activation process of ULK1C. In the inactive state, the ULK1C core forms a FIP200:ULK1:ATG13 complex with a 2:1:1 stoichiometry, where the ATG13IDR extensively interacts with the FIP200arm (sites #1–3), preventing the binding of a second ULK1:ATG13 subdimer (left). Alteration of stoichiometry can be induced by (i) increased local concentration or (ii) presence of PI3KC3-C1, which disrupts the ATG13:FIP200 interaction and facilitates the recruitment of the second ULK1:ATG13 subdimer to the core. This results in the formation of a 2:2:2 complex, enhancing the autophosphorylation of ULK1 (right).

Model of ULK1C activation. Schematic diagram illustrating the activation process of ULK1C. In the inactive state, the ULK1C core forms a FIP200:ULK1:ATG13 complex with a 2:1:1 stoichiometry, where the ATG13IDR extensively interacts with the FIP200arm (sites #1–3), preventing the binding of a second ULK1:ATG13 subdimer (left). Alteration of stoichiometry can be induced by (i) increased local concentration or (ii) presence of PI3KC3-C1, which disrupts the ATG13:FIP200 interaction and facilitates the recruitment of the second ULK1:ATG13 subdimer to the core. This results in the formation of a 2:2:2 complex, enhancing the autophosphorylation of ULK1 (right).

In addition, ULK1 is directly anchored to the autophagosome formation site through palmitoylation of Cys927 and Cys1003 on the MIT domain. Depletion of the palmitoyl transferase ZDHHC13 impairs the recruitment of ULK1C and reduces the phosphorylation of ATG14, underscoring its role in the early steps of autophagy initiation (87).

Overview of PI3KC3-C1PI3KC3-C1 is the second autophagy core complex, usually, but not always (18), functioning immediately downstream of ULK1C. This 360 kDa complex is composed of one copy each of four subunits: the lipid kinase vacuolar protein sorting 34 (VPS34), the regulatory subunit VPS15, and the membrane binding subunits BECN1 and ATG14, forming a 1:1:1:1 heterotetrametric assembly (88) (Fig. 4A). The kinase subunit VPS34 was first identified in budding yeast (89, 90, 91) and remains the sole member of the class III PI3K family across eukaryotes (92). The primary function of VPS34 is to produce PI(3)P, an essential lipid mediator in phagophore formation (93). The pseudokinase VPS15 was identified shortly after VPS34 as a constitutive binding partner essential for activity (94, 95, 96). Subsequent studies revealed that the N-terminal pseudokinase domain of VPS15 directly regulates the VPS34 kinase activity by sequestering its catalytic site (86, 97). BECN1 promotes autophagy (98) as a component of the PI3KC3-C1/C2 complexes (99) by providing a membrane binding site and interacting with various regulators, including Rubicon and AMBRA1 (100, 101). BECN1 is also a known binding target of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 mediated through its BH3 domain (102). ATG14 is the autophagy-specific subunit of PI3KC3-C1 (99, 103), and its phosphorylation at S29 by ULK1 is critical for autophagy initiation (74). ATG14 can be replaced by UV irradiation resistance-associated gene (UVRAG) while keeping the other three subunits (VPS34, VPS15, and BECN1) the same, to form the PI3KC3-C2 complex, which is central to endolysosomal sorting and also functions in later stages of autophagy (99, 104). The overall structure of the PI3KC3-C1 adopts a Y-shape conformation, which can be divided into a catalytic arm, an adaptor arm, a base, and a tail region (Fig. 4B). The catalytic domain constitutes only 11% of the total molecular mass of the complex, with the remaining 89% comprising non-catalytic components responsible for regulatory functions, including autoinhibition, activation, membrane targeting, and recruitment of other regulators. In the following sections, we will explore these regions in detail and discuss their respective functions.Figure 4Overall structure of PI3KC3-C1. A, schematic representations for the subunits of PI3KC3-C1, with domains and their corresponding residue ranges indicated. B, top view of the active state of PI3KC3-C1 (PDB ID: 9MHH). Domains and their interacting proteins are labeled. A schematic diagram of the overall structure is shown in the top-left corner, with each region labeled: catalytic arm, adaptor arm, base, and tail. C, side view of the active PI3KC3-C1 structure, along with its corresponding schematic diagram.

Overview of PI3KC3-C1

PI3KC3-C1 is the second autophagy core complex, usually, but not always (18), functioning immediately downstream of ULK1C. This 360 kDa complex is composed of one copy each of four subunits: the lipid kinase vacuolar protein sorting 34 (VPS34), the regulatory subunit VPS15, and the membrane binding subunits BECN1 and ATG14, forming a 1:1:1:1 heterotetrametric assembly (88) (Fig. 4A). The kinase subunit VPS34 was first identified in budding yeast (89, 90, 91) and remains the sole member of the class III PI3K family across eukaryotes (92). The primary function of VPS34 is to produce PI(3)P, an essential lipid mediator in phagophore formation (93). The pseudokinase VPS15 was identified shortly after VPS34 as a constitutive binding partner essential for activity (94, 95, 96). Subsequent studies revealed that the N-terminal pseudokinase domain of VPS15 directly regulates the VPS34 kinase activity by sequestering its catalytic site (86, 97). BECN1 promotes autophagy (98) as a component of the PI3KC3-C1/C2 complexes (99) by providing a membrane binding site and interacting with various regulators, including Rubicon and AMBRA1 (100, 101). BECN1 is also a known binding target of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 mediated through its BH3 domain (102). ATG14 is the autophagy-specific subunit of PI3KC3-C1 (99, 103), and its phosphorylation at S29 by ULK1 is critical for autophagy initiation (74). ATG14 can be replaced by UV irradiation resistance-associated gene (UVRAG) while keeping the other three subunits (VPS34, VPS15, and BECN1) the same, to form the PI3KC3-C2 complex, which is central to endolysosomal sorting and also functions in later stages of autophagy (99, 104). The overall structure of the PI3KC3-C1 adopts a Y-shape conformation, which can be divided into a catalytic arm, an adaptor arm, a base, and a tail region (Fig. 4B). The catalytic domain constitutes only 11% of the total molecular mass of the complex, with the remaining 89% comprising non-catalytic components responsible for regulatory functions, including autoinhibition, activation, membrane targeting, and recruitment of other regulators. In the following sections, we will explore these regions in detail and discuss their respective functions.Figure 4Overall structure of PI3KC3-C1. A, schematic representations for the subunits of PI3KC3-C1, with domains and their corresponding residue ranges indicated. B, top view of the active state of PI3KC3-C1 (PDB ID: 9MHH). Domains and their interacting proteins are labeled. A schematic diagram of the overall structure is shown in the top-left corner, with each region labeled: catalytic arm, adaptor arm, base, and tail. C, side view of the active PI3KC3-C1 structure, along with its corresponding schematic diagram.

Overall structure of PI3KC3-C1. A, schematic representations for the subunits of PI3KC3-C1, with domains and their corresponding residue ranges indicated. B, top view of the active state of PI3KC3-C1 (PDB ID: 9MHH). Domains and their interacting proteins are labeled. A schematic diagram of the overall structure is shown in the top-left corner, with each region labeled: catalytic arm, adaptor arm, base, and tail. C, side view of the active PI3KC3-C1 structure, along with its corresponding schematic diagram.

The catalytic armThe catalytic arm is composed of the VPS34 kinase domain (VPS34KD), the VPS34 helical domain (VPS34HD), and the VPS15 pseudokinase domain (VPS15PKD). VPS34KD is the “business end” of the complex in that it is directly responsible for the ATP-dependent phosphorylation of the 3′ position of phosphatidylinositol (PI). Structural studies of catalytic arm rearrangements have elucidated how VPS34KD activity is regulated. The VPS34KD and VPS34HD together form the HELCAT (HELical and CATalytic) region initially described in crystallography studies (105, 106). VPS34KD dynamics, or at least the ability of VPS34KD to reposition itself, are essential for function in the context of PI3KC3-C1 (97, 107, 108, 109). In the inactive state, the catalytic site of VPS34KD is sequestered by the adjacent VPS15PKD, rendering it inaccessible to membrane-localized PI. Conversely, in the active state, the VPS34KD undergoes a 140-degree rotation, fully exposing the catalytic site to engage with PI in the membrane (86).This conformational shift is directly regulated by VPS15PKD, which acts as a scaffold extending from the base region of PI3KC3-C1 (Fig. 5). A single face of VPS15PKD can bind to two distinct surfaces of VPS34KD. The nature of the interaction with VPS34KD is regulated by the conformation of the N-myristoyl modification of VPS15. It has long been known that the N-terminus of VPS15 is myristoylated (94, 95, 110), but only recently appreciated that the VPS15 N-myristate plays an important role in regulating VPS34 (86). In the inactive state, the myristate is sequestered within the N-lobe of the VPS15PKD, stabilizing a series of interactions between VPS15PKD and one face of VPS34KD so as to hold VPS34KD in the closed state. Upon activation, the myristate is liberated from its pocket, disrupting the original interactions and altering the binding preference to the open state. This mechanism is in some ways reminiscent of the myristoyl switch observed in Recoverin and ARF GTPases (111, 112, 113, 114), where the myristoyl moiety is sequestered in a hydrophobic pocket and released upon specific stimuli (e.g. Ca2+ binding or GTP exchange), enhancing the protein-membrane association by inserting the myristoyl chain into the lipid bilayer.Figure 5Model of PI3KC3-C1 activation. A, side view comparison of PI3KC3-C1 in its inactive (PDB ID: 9MHG) and active states (PDB ID: 9MHH). The membrane binding motifs and the presumed position of the membrane are indicated. B, schematic diagram illustrating the activation process of PI3KC3-C1. In the inactive state, the VPS34KD clashes with the membrane. Upon activation, the N-myristate of VPS15PKD is released from the pocket and inserted into the membrane, leading to a 140-degree rotation of VPS34KD. This conformational change allows VPS34KD to fully associate with the membrane, facilitating catalytic activity. The relative positions of N-myristate (N-myr), membrane binding helix (MBH), ATP, and GTP/GDP are indicated.The myristate pocket of VPS15PKD is adjacent to the “active site” nucleotide binding pocket in VPS15PKD, which is unique in the kinome in its specificity for GTP molecule over ATP (113, 114). VPS15PKD has thus far not been demonstrated to be competent for GTP hydrolysis, suggesting that the GTP has a structural role, but is not necessarily turned over as part of its regulatory mechanism. To summarize, these observations suggest a complex regulatory interplay involving GTP, sequestration and release of the N-myristate, and a closed-open conformational change in regulating the ability of VPS34KD to access its membrane substrate.

The catalytic arm

The catalytic arm is composed of the VPS34 kinase domain (VPS34KD), the VPS34 helical domain (VPS34HD), and the VPS15 pseudokinase domain (VPS15PKD). VPS34KD is the “business end” of the complex in that it is directly responsible for the ATP-dependent phosphorylation of the 3′ position of phosphatidylinositol (PI). Structural studies of catalytic arm rearrangements have elucidated how VPS34KD activity is regulated. The VPS34KD and VPS34HD together form the HELCAT (HELical and CATalytic) region initially described in crystallography studies (105, 106). VPS34KD dynamics, or at least the ability of VPS34KD to reposition itself, are essential for function in the context of PI3KC3-C1 (97, 107, 108, 109). In the inactive state, the catalytic site of VPS34KD is sequestered by the adjacent VPS15PKD, rendering it inaccessible to membrane-localized PI. Conversely, in the active state, the VPS34KD undergoes a 140-degree rotation, fully exposing the catalytic site to engage with PI in the membrane (86).

This conformational shift is directly regulated by VPS15PKD, which acts as a scaffold extending from the base region of PI3KC3-C1 (Fig. 5). A single face of VPS15PKD can bind to two distinct surfaces of VPS34KD. The nature of the interaction with VPS34KD is regulated by the conformation of the N-myristoyl modification of VPS15. It has long been known that the N-terminus of VPS15 is myristoylated (94, 95, 110), but only recently appreciated that the VPS15 N-myristate plays an important role in regulating VPS34 (86). In the inactive state, the myristate is sequestered within the N-lobe of the VPS15PKD, stabilizing a series of interactions between VPS15PKD and one face of VPS34KD so as to hold VPS34KD in the closed state. Upon activation, the myristate is liberated from its pocket, disrupting the original interactions and altering the binding preference to the open state. This mechanism is in some ways reminiscent of the myristoyl switch observed in Recoverin and ARF GTPases (111, 112, 113, 114), where the myristoyl moiety is sequestered in a hydrophobic pocket and released upon specific stimuli (e.g. Ca2+ binding or GTP exchange), enhancing the protein-membrane association by inserting the myristoyl chain into the lipid bilayer.Figure 5Model of PI3KC3-C1 activation. A, side view comparison of PI3KC3-C1 in its inactive (PDB ID: 9MHG) and active states (PDB ID: 9MHH). The membrane binding motifs and the presumed position of the membrane are indicated. B, schematic diagram illustrating the activation process of PI3KC3-C1. In the inactive state, the VPS34KD clashes with the membrane. Upon activation, the N-myristate of VPS15PKD is released from the pocket and inserted into the membrane, leading to a 140-degree rotation of VPS34KD. This conformational change allows VPS34KD to fully associate with the membrane, facilitating catalytic activity. The relative positions of N-myristate (N-myr), membrane binding helix (MBH), ATP, and GTP/GDP are indicated.

Model of PI3KC3-C1 activation. A, side view comparison of PI3KC3-C1 in its inactive (PDB ID: 9MHG) and active states (PDB ID: 9MHH). The membrane binding motifs and the presumed position of the membrane are indicated. B, schematic diagram illustrating the activation process of PI3KC3-C1. In the inactive state, the VPS34KD clashes with the membrane. Upon activation, the N-myristate of VPS15PKD is released from the pocket and inserted into the membrane, leading to a 140-degree rotation of VPS34KD. This conformational change allows VPS34KD to fully associate with the membrane, facilitating catalytic activity. The relative positions of N-myristate (N-myr), membrane binding helix (MBH), ATP, and GTP/GDP are indicated.

The myristate pocket of VPS15PKD is adjacent to the “active site” nucleotide binding pocket in VPS15PKD, which is unique in the kinome in its specificity for GTP molecule over ATP (113, 114). VPS15PKD has thus far not been demonstrated to be competent for GTP hydrolysis, suggesting that the GTP has a structural role, but is not necessarily turned over as part of its regulatory mechanism. To summarize, these observations suggest a complex regulatory interplay involving GTP, sequestration and release of the N-myristate, and a closed-open conformational change in regulating the ability of VPS34KD to access its membrane substrate.

The adaptor armThe adaptor arm of PI3KC3-C1 comprises the VPS15 WD40 repeat domain (VPS15WD40), BECN1 beta-alpha repeat autophagy domain (BECN1BARA), ATG14 C-terminal domain (ATG14CTD), and ATG14 Bakor/ATG14 L autophagosome targeting sequence domains (ATG14BATS). The VPS15WD40 serves as a scaffold, while the BECN1BARA and ATG14CTD-BATS are responsible for membrane targeting. A hyperexposed aromatic finger of BECN1, consisting of Phe359, Phe360, and Trp361, acts as the primary membrane-binding site and is located at the tip of the adaptor arm (115, 116). In addition, Chang et al. identified a beta-sheet of BECN1 containing Phe270 and Phe274 that can undock from the BARA domain and insert into membranes. This secondary membrane binding site is a regulatory target in PI3KC3-C2 for at least three proteins: Rubicon, HIV-1 Nef, and Tat-BECN1 peptide (T-BP) (100).The ATG14BATS domain can also bind to membranes via a C-terminal amphipathic helix referred to as the amphipathic lipid packing sensor (ALPS), which does not recognize the curved geometry of membranes per se, but rather defects in lipid packing that arise from either membrane bending or other causes (117, 118, 119). ATG14BATS is a transplantable motif that increases the affinity of PI3KC3 complexes for membranes (108) and enzyme activity (119).

The adaptor arm

The adaptor arm of PI3KC3-C1 comprises the VPS15 WD40 repeat domain (VPS15WD40), BECN1 beta-alpha repeat autophagy domain (BECN1BARA), ATG14 C-terminal domain (ATG14CTD), and ATG14 Bakor/ATG14 L autophagosome targeting sequence domains (ATG14BATS). The VPS15WD40 serves as a scaffold, while the BECN1BARA and ATG14CTD-BATS are responsible for membrane targeting. A hyperexposed aromatic finger of BECN1, consisting of Phe359, Phe360, and Trp361, acts as the primary membrane-binding site and is located at the tip of the adaptor arm (115, 116). In addition, Chang et al. identified a beta-sheet of BECN1 containing Phe270 and Phe274 that can undock from the BARA domain and insert into membranes. This secondary membrane binding site is a regulatory target in PI3KC3-C2 for at least three proteins: Rubicon, HIV-1 Nef, and Tat-BECN1 peptide (T-BP) (100).

The ATG14BATS domain can also bind to membranes via a C-terminal amphipathic helix referred to as the amphipathic lipid packing sensor (ALPS), which does not recognize the curved geometry of membranes per se, but rather defects in lipid packing that arise from either membrane bending or other causes (117, 118, 119). ATG14BATS is a transplantable motif that increases the affinity of PI3KC3 complexes for membranes (108) and enzyme activity (119).

The base regionThe base region of PI3KC3-C1 consists of the VPS34 C2 domain (VPS34C2), the VPS34 helical hairpin (VPS34HH) motif, and the VPS15 helical solenoid domain (VPS15HSD). This region provides a scaffold for various accessory proteins that regulate complex assembly and function. One of the key accessory proteins is the GTPase Rab1, which plays a crucial role in recruiting PI3KC3-C1 to the early phagophores (120). PI3KC3-C1 binds to Rab1 via a cleft formed by the VPS34C2 and VPS34HH, accommodating the GTP sensing switch-II region of Rab1 stabilized in the GTP-binding state (86). The VPS34C2-HH pocket also mediates binding to Rab5 in PI3KC3-C2, while neither the PI3KC3-C1-specific component BECN1 nor the C2-specific component UVRAG directly interacts with Rab proteins (86, 120). While it is clear that Rab1 and Rab5 recognition contributes to the targeting and activation of PI3KC3-C1 and -C2, respectively, a complete structural explanation for the differential regulation of the two complexes remains to be obtained.The VPS15HSD provides the primary binding site for nuclear receptor binding factor 2 (NRBF2), which is often considered as the fifth component of PI3KC3-C1 (121) due to its strong binding affinity (Kd = 40 nM) (122) and its role in activity regulation (122, 123, 124). NRBF2 is a homodimeric protein and interacts with PI3KC3-C1 through its N-terminal domain (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88). Earlier studies demonstrated that NRBF2 induces the dimerization of PI3KC3-C1, forming a NRBF2:PI3KC3-C1 2:2 stoichiometry complex, where one NRBF2 dimer recruits two PI3KC3-C1 complexes (122, 125). However, subsequent research reported that an excess amount of NRBF2 is necessary to fully activate PI3KC3-C1, implying the presence of a secondary regulation site within the complex (109). NRBF2 is specific for PI3KC3-C1, consistent with the fact that its binding site on VPS15HSD is blocked by the C2 domain of UVRAG in PI3KC3-C2 (121, 123, 126). Despite its tight binding, the availability of a moderate-resolution cryo-EM structure, and its evident functional importance, there is more yet to be learned concerning the role of NRBF2 in PI3KC3 regulation.

The base region

The base region of PI3KC3-C1 consists of the VPS34 C2 domain (VPS34C2), the VPS34 helical hairpin (VPS34HH) motif, and the VPS15 helical solenoid domain (VPS15HSD). This region provides a scaffold for various accessory proteins that regulate complex assembly and function. One of the key accessory proteins is the GTPase Rab1, which plays a crucial role in recruiting PI3KC3-C1 to the early phagophores (120). PI3KC3-C1 binds to Rab1 via a cleft formed by the VPS34C2 and VPS34HH, accommodating the GTP sensing switch-II region of Rab1 stabilized in the GTP-binding state (86). The VPS34C2-HH pocket also mediates binding to Rab5 in PI3KC3-C2, while neither the PI3KC3-C1-specific component BECN1 nor the C2-specific component UVRAG directly interacts with Rab proteins (86, 120). While it is clear that Rab1 and Rab5 recognition contributes to the targeting and activation of PI3KC3-C1 and -C2, respectively, a complete structural explanation for the differential regulation of the two complexes remains to be obtained.

The VPS15HSD provides the primary binding site for nuclear receptor binding factor 2 (NRBF2), which is often considered as the fifth component of PI3KC3-C1 (121) due to its strong binding affinity (Kd = 40 nM) (122) and its role in activity regulation (122, 123, 124). NRBF2 is a homodimeric protein and interacts with PI3KC3-C1 through its N-terminal domain (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88). Earlier studies demonstrated that NRBF2 induces the dimerization of PI3KC3-C1, forming a NRBF2:PI3KC3-C1 2:2 stoichiometry complex, where one NRBF2 dimer recruits two PI3KC3-C1 complexes (122, 125). However, subsequent research reported that an excess amount of NRBF2 is necessary to fully activate PI3KC3-C1, implying the presence of a secondary regulation site within the complex (109). NRBF2 is specific for PI3KC3-C1, consistent with the fact that its binding site on VPS15HSD is blocked by the C2 domain of UVRAG in PI3KC3-C2 (121, 123, 126). Despite its tight binding, the availability of a moderate-resolution cryo-EM structure, and its evident functional importance, there is more yet to be learned concerning the role of NRBF2 in PI3KC3 regulation.

The tail regionAlthough the overall structure of PI3KC3-C1 is often described as “V-shaped”, the complex indeed extends into a “Y-shape” due to the presence of a tail region composed of the N-termini of BECN1(1–136) and ATG14 (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72). The tail is not visualized in most cryo-EM structures due to intrinsic disorder (127), but it harbors multiple motifs that play essential roles in the regulation of PI3KC3-C1, and it has been visualized at moderate resolution in the context of the supercomplex with ULK1C (38).The BH3 motif (BECN1BH3, residues 110–126), is a key regulatory element within the tail region (128). Under nutrient-rich conditions, the BECN1BH3 is sequestered by Bcl-2 family proteins, thereby preventing the formation of functional PI3KC3-C1 and suppressing autophagy (129). In contrast, under starvation conditions, the BECN1BH3 is released either by phosphorylation of Bcl-2 family proteins or by competitive displacement by other BH3 proteins, leading to autophagy activation (130, 131, 132). The ULK1C:PI3KC3-C1 supercomplex structure revealed that the BECN1BH3 contributes to supercomplex formation through interaction with FIP200, suggesting the accessibility of BECN1BH3 could influence its ability to interact with ULK1C in autophagy initiation (38). BECN1BH3 is protected from hydrogen-deuterium exchange upon binding with proautophagic protein NRBF2 (122). These seemingly contradictory observations call for further investigation.Both BECN1 and ATG14 contain two CxxC motifs at their N-termini, which are highly conserved across all eukaryotes (133). The CxxC motifs in BECN1 (Cys18-Cys21 and Cys137-Cys140) are responsible for coordinating Zn2+ ions and are critical for starvation-induced autophagy (134). In ATG14, the two CxxC motifs (Cys43-Cys46 and Cys55-Cys58) are essential for its localization on the ER (135). Our recent cryo-EM structure revealed one CxxC motif from BECN1 (Cys137-Cys140) and one from ATG14 (Cys43-Cys46) form a heterogeneous Zn-finger positioned behind the BH3 domain, supporting its interaction with FIP200 (38). The motif swapping and their resulting Zn-finger formation raise the possibility of a regulatory role in the functions of PI3KC3-C1.

The tail region

Although the overall structure of PI3KC3-C1 is often described as “V-shaped”, the complex indeed extends into a “Y-shape” due to the presence of a tail region composed of the N-termini of BECN1(1–136) and ATG14 (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72). The tail is not visualized in most cryo-EM structures due to intrinsic disorder (127), but it harbors multiple motifs that play essential roles in the regulation of PI3KC3-C1, and it has been visualized at moderate resolution in the context of the supercomplex with ULK1C (38).

The BH3 motif (BECN1BH3, residues 110–126), is a key regulatory element within the tail region (128). Under nutrient-rich conditions, the BECN1BH3 is sequestered by Bcl-2 family proteins, thereby preventing the formation of functional PI3KC3-C1 and suppressing autophagy (129). In contrast, under starvation conditions, the BECN1BH3 is released either by phosphorylation of Bcl-2 family proteins or by competitive displacement by other BH3 proteins, leading to autophagy activation (130, 131, 132). The ULK1C:PI3KC3-C1 supercomplex structure revealed that the BECN1BH3 contributes to supercomplex formation through interaction with FIP200, suggesting the accessibility of BECN1BH3 could influence its ability to interact with ULK1C in autophagy initiation (38). BECN1BH3 is protected from hydrogen-deuterium exchange upon binding with proautophagic protein NRBF2 (122). These seemingly contradictory observations call for further investigation.

Both BECN1 and ATG14 contain two CxxC motifs at their N-termini, which are highly conserved across all eukaryotes (133). The CxxC motifs in BECN1 (Cys18-Cys21 and Cys137-Cys140) are responsible for coordinating Zn2+ ions and are critical for starvation-induced autophagy (134). In ATG14, the two CxxC motifs (Cys43-Cys46 and Cys55-Cys58) are essential for its localization on the ER (135). Our recent cryo-EM structure revealed one CxxC motif from BECN1 (Cys137-Cys140) and one from ATG14 (Cys43-Cys46) form a heterogeneous Zn-finger positioned behind the BH3 domain, supporting its interaction with FIP200 (38). The motif swapping and their resulting Zn-finger formation raise the possibility of a regulatory role in the functions of PI3KC3-C1.

Activation of PI3KC3-C1Understanding the activation of PI3KC3-C1 is one of the central questions for elucidating autophagy initiation. Extensive research has focused on identifying the post-translational modifications of PI3KC3-C1, including phosphorylation (88), myristoylation (94, 95), acetylation (136, 137), palmitoylation (138), and SUMOylation (139). Among these, phosphorylation has been particularly well-studied, significantly advancing our knowledge of the autophagy signaling pathways involving the kinases mTORC, ULK1, AMPK, Akt, and DAPK, among others (140, 141, 142, 143, 144). Most of these modifications have been characterized at the cellular level, but the precise molecular mechanism remains elusive in most cases because most of the phosphosites are on intrinsically disordered loops and distant from the catalytic center and known accessory protein binding sites.Enhancing the membrane association properties of PI3KC3-C1 is a direct mechanism for its activation. The BECN1BARA and ATG14BATS domains play primary roles in membrane interaction and curvature sensing (115, 117). Moreover, the small GTPase Rab1 has been demonstrated to activate PI3KC3-C1 by recruiting it to target membranes (120), but also by biasing its overall conformation towards the active state (86). The interaction between the VPS34KD and VPS15PKD is at the crux of PI3KC3 activation (97, 106, 109, 120). The active, open conformation of PI3KC3-C1 is characterized by the exposure of both the catalytic site of VPS34KD and the myristoylated N-terminus of VPS15. Given the observation that (i) PI3KC3-C1 adopts a flat overall structure in the open state (Fig. 4C) and (ii) all the above-mentioned sites are on the same side of the PI3KC3-C1 complex, a model for membrane docking was developed that presents an extensive surface to the membrane (86). This model was validated by all-atom molecular dynamics (MD) simulations (86), allowing all the above-mentioned membrane binding elements to simultaneously associate with the target membrane (Fig. 5).The BH3 domain of BECN1 is a long-studied region for regulating the activity of PI3KC3-C1, primarily through its interaction with Bcl-2 family proteins including Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, Bcl-w, and Mcl-1 (129, 145). The interaction between BECN1 and Bcl-2 is regulated by various proteins. Activating molecule in BECN1-regulated autophagy protein 1 (AMBRA1) is a pro-autophagy protein that competes with Bcl-2 for binding to BECN1 (146). Upon starvation, AMBRA1 is phosphorylated by the ULK1C, which enhances the formation of the AMBRA1-BECN1 complex and facilitates its relocation to the phagophore assembly site to participate in autophagy initiation (75, 147). Additionally, the ER-localized transmembrane protein, vacuole membrane protein 1 (VMP1), is reported to interact with the BH3 domain of BECN1, releasing it from Bcl-2 and promoting the autophagy initiation (148, 149). The various reports of cellular relocalization of PI3KC3-C1 driven by BECN1BH3 will ideally be further corroborated by biochemical and structural analyses in the coming years.

Activation of PI3KC3-C1

Understanding the activation of PI3KC3-C1 is one of the central questions for elucidating autophagy initiation. Extensive research has focused on identifying the post-translational modifications of PI3KC3-C1, including phosphorylation (88), myristoylation (94, 95), acetylation (136, 137), palmitoylation (138), and SUMOylation (139). Among these, phosphorylation has been particularly well-studied, significantly advancing our knowledge of the autophagy signaling pathways involving the kinases mTORC, ULK1, AMPK, Akt, and DAPK, among others (140, 141, 142, 143, 144). Most of these modifications have been characterized at the cellular level, but the precise molecular mechanism remains elusive in most cases because most of the phosphosites are on intrinsically disordered loops and distant from the catalytic center and known accessory protein binding sites.

Enhancing the membrane association properties of PI3KC3-C1 is a direct mechanism for its activation. The BECN1BARA and ATG14BATS domains play primary roles in membrane interaction and curvature sensing (115, 117). Moreover, the small GTPase Rab1 has been demonstrated to activate PI3KC3-C1 by recruiting it to target membranes (120), but also by biasing its overall conformation towards the active state (86). The interaction between the VPS34KD and VPS15PKD is at the crux of PI3KC3 activation (97, 106, 109, 120). The active, open conformation of PI3KC3-C1 is characterized by the exposure of both the catalytic site of VPS34KD and the myristoylated N-terminus of VPS15. Given the observation that (i) PI3KC3-C1 adopts a flat overall structure in the open state (Fig. 4C) and (ii) all the above-mentioned sites are on the same side of the PI3KC3-C1 complex, a model for membrane docking was developed that presents an extensive surface to the membrane (86). This model was validated by all-atom molecular dynamics (MD) simulations (86), allowing all the above-mentioned membrane binding elements to simultaneously associate with the target membrane (Fig. 5).

The BH3 domain of BECN1 is a long-studied region for regulating the activity of PI3KC3-C1, primarily through its interaction with Bcl-2 family proteins including Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, Bcl-w, and Mcl-1 (129, 145). The interaction between BECN1 and Bcl-2 is regulated by various proteins. Activating molecule in BECN1-regulated autophagy protein 1 (AMBRA1) is a pro-autophagy protein that competes with Bcl-2 for binding to BECN1 (146). Upon starvation, AMBRA1 is phosphorylated by the ULK1C, which enhances the formation of the AMBRA1-BECN1 complex and facilitates its relocation to the phagophore assembly site to participate in autophagy initiation (75, 147). Additionally, the ER-localized transmembrane protein, vacuole membrane protein 1 (VMP1), is reported to interact with the BH3 domain of BECN1, releasing it from Bcl-2 and promoting the autophagy initiation (148, 149). The various reports of cellular relocalization of PI3KC3-C1 driven by BECN1BH3 will ideally be further corroborated by biochemical and structural analyses in the coming years.

Crosstalk between ULK1C and PI3KC3-C1As the two most upstream core complexes in the autophagy signaling pathway, the interplay between ULK1C and PI3KC3-C1 is thought to be crucial for phagophore formation. ULK1 directly phosphorylates all the four subunits of PI3KC3-C1, enhancing its activity and increasing the production of PI(3)P (70, 73, 74, 150, 151, 152). ULK1 kinase phosphorylates key regulators of PI3KC3-C1, including mTORC1, AMPK, and AMBRA1, which eventually impinge upon PI3KC3-C1 activity (75, 140, 142). In addition to phosphorylation, ULK1C physically interacts with PI3KC3-C1, which could potentially facilitate the recruitment of PI3KC3-C1 to the phagophore assembly site. The two complexes interact via the FIP200 arm region of ULK1C and the VPS15HSD-tail regions of PI3KC3-C1 (38) (Fig. 6). The interaction between ULK1C and PI3KC3-C1 extends beyond a simple one-directional regulation. Our recent study observed a shift in the stoichiometry of ULK1C from 2:1:1 to 2:2:2 in the presence of PI3KC3-C1 (38). By analogy to the dimerization-linked activation of many other kinases, the dimerization of ULK1 in this context could, in principle, trigger autophosphorylation. ULK1 autophosphorylation at Thr180 is known to be required for ULK1 kinase activity (36). ULK1 initiates autophagy within puncta containing more than 30 molecules that are co-localized with PI3KC3-C1 (153). It is attractive to speculate that membrane binding by PI3KC3-C1 and ULK1C mutually increases their local concentration and activity at the phagophore assembly site.Figure 6Interface between ULK1C and PI3KC3-C1. A, top view of the ULK1C:PI3KC3-C1 supercomplex model, generated by superposing the moderate-resolution supercomplex structure (PDB ID: 9C82) with the high-resolution structures of ULK1C core (PDB ID: 8SOI) and PI3KC3-C1 active state (PDB ID: 9MHH). Each subunit and its corresponding domains are labeled. B, Schematic diagram of panelA. C and D, side view of the supercomplex model and its schematic diagram.

Crosstalk between ULK1C and PI3KC3-C1

As the two most upstream core complexes in the autophagy signaling pathway, the interplay between ULK1C and PI3KC3-C1 is thought to be crucial for phagophore formation. ULK1 directly phosphorylates all the four subunits of PI3KC3-C1, enhancing its activity and increasing the production of PI(3)P (70, 73, 74, 150, 151, 152). ULK1 kinase phosphorylates key regulators of PI3KC3-C1, including mTORC1, AMPK, and AMBRA1, which eventually impinge upon PI3KC3-C1 activity (75, 140, 142). In addition to phosphorylation, ULK1C physically interacts with PI3KC3-C1, which could potentially facilitate the recruitment of PI3KC3-C1 to the phagophore assembly site. The two complexes interact via the FIP200 arm region of ULK1C and the VPS15HSD-tail regions of PI3KC3-C1 (38) (Fig. 6). The interaction between ULK1C and PI3KC3-C1 extends beyond a simple one-directional regulation. Our recent study observed a shift in the stoichiometry of ULK1C from 2:1:1 to 2:2:2 in the presence of PI3KC3-C1 (38). By analogy to the dimerization-linked activation of many other kinases, the dimerization of ULK1 in this context could, in principle, trigger autophosphorylation. ULK1 autophosphorylation at Thr180 is known to be required for ULK1 kinase activity (36). ULK1 initiates autophagy within puncta containing more than 30 molecules that are co-localized with PI3KC3-C1 (153). It is attractive to speculate that membrane binding by PI3KC3-C1 and ULK1C mutually increases their local concentration and activity at the phagophore assembly site.Figure 6Interface between ULK1C and PI3KC3-C1. A, top view of the ULK1C:PI3KC3-C1 supercomplex model, generated by superposing the moderate-resolution supercomplex structure (PDB ID: 9C82) with the high-resolution structures of ULK1C core (PDB ID: 8SOI) and PI3KC3-C1 active state (PDB ID: 9MHH). Each subunit and its corresponding domains are labeled. B, Schematic diagram of panelA. C and D, side view of the supercomplex model and its schematic diagram.

Interface between ULK1C and PI3KC3-C1. A, top view of the ULK1C:PI3KC3-C1 supercomplex model, generated by superposing the moderate-resolution supercomplex structure (PDB ID: 9C82) with the high-resolution structures of ULK1C core (PDB ID: 8SOI) and PI3KC3-C1 active state (PDB ID: 9MHH). Each subunit and its corresponding domains are labeled. B, Schematic diagram of panelA. C and D, side view of the supercomplex model and its schematic diagram.

Summary and outlookULK1C and PI3KC3-C1 are pivotal in the autophagy initiation. Recent advances in our understanding of these two core complexes have shed light on their intricate regulation and activation mechanisms. ULK1C is not only the most upstream kinase in the phagophore formation signaling pathway under most circumstances, but also a versatile scaffold that bridges cargo receptors to the rest of the core autophagy machinery. Autophosphorylation is critical for ULK1 kinase activation, potentially enhanced through dimerization of ULK1 on the scaffold subunit FIP200. Conversely, PI3KC3-C1 functions as a crucial lipid kinase downstream of ULK1. Its activity is modulated by conformational change of the VPS34KD domain, which enhances membrane association and facilitates the production of PI(3)P on phagophore.The initiation of phagophore formation is typically described as a hierarchical process, beginning with ULK1C activating PI3KC3-C1, which then recruits the PI(3)P effector WIPI proteins, followed by the assembly of ATG9A, ATG2A and the ATG12-ATG5-ATG16L1 complex. It is becoming clear that this process is far from a simple one-directional cascade. Recent reports have uncovered multiple feedback loops, such as the FIP200-ATG16 interaction (56), the ULK1-GABARAP interaction (154), the PI3K-GABARAP interaction (15), PI3KC3-C1-TBK1 (18), and the PI3KC3-C1-WIPI2 interaction (155), Our recent findings on the interplay between ULK1C and PI3KC3-C1 have introduced another feedback mechanism that alters the stoichiometry of ULK1C, providing new insights into this intricate and sophisticated network.High-resolution structures of ULK1C core, PI3KC3-C1, and their supercomplex have revealed amino acid-level details of these complexes, highlighting several potential regulatory sites. Notable sites include the FIP200NTD: ATG13IDR and the FIP200NTD: PI3KC3-C1 interaction regions, which are critical for ULK1 activation, as well as the N-myristate pocket and the GTP binding site on VPS15PKD, which are pivotal for PI3KC3-C1 activation. These newly identified regulatory sites present attractive targets for pharmaceutical development, potentially enabling the modulation of autophagy initiation as a therapeutic strategy.

Summary and outlook

ULK1C and PI3KC3-C1 are pivotal in the autophagy initiation. Recent advances in our understanding of these two core complexes have shed light on their intricate regulation and activation mechanisms. ULK1C is not only the most upstream kinase in the phagophore formation signaling pathway under most circumstances, but also a versatile scaffold that bridges cargo receptors to the rest of the core autophagy machinery. Autophosphorylation is critical for ULK1 kinase activation, potentially enhanced through dimerization of ULK1 on the scaffold subunit FIP200. Conversely, PI3KC3-C1 functions as a crucial lipid kinase downstream of ULK1. Its activity is modulated by conformational change of the VPS34KD domain, which enhances membrane association and facilitates the production of PI(3)P on phagophore.

The initiation of phagophore formation is typically described as a hierarchical process, beginning with ULK1C activating PI3KC3-C1, which then recruits the PI(3)P effector WIPI proteins, followed by the assembly of ATG9A, ATG2A and the ATG12-ATG5-ATG16L1 complex. It is becoming clear that this process is far from a simple one-directional cascade. Recent reports have uncovered multiple feedback loops, such as the FIP200-ATG16 interaction (56), the ULK1-GABARAP interaction (154), the PI3K-GABARAP interaction (15), PI3KC3-C1-TBK1 (18), and the PI3KC3-C1-WIPI2 interaction (155), Our recent findings on the interplay between ULK1C and PI3KC3-C1 have introduced another feedback mechanism that alters the stoichiometry of ULK1C, providing new insights into this intricate and sophisticated network.

High-resolution structures of ULK1C core, PI3KC3-C1, and their supercomplex have revealed amino acid-level details of these complexes, highlighting several potential regulatory sites. Notable sites include the FIP200NTD: ATG13IDR and the FIP200NTD: PI3KC3-C1 interaction regions, which are critical for ULK1 activation, as well as the N-myristate pocket and the GTP binding site on VPS15PKD, which are pivotal for PI3KC3-C1 activation. These newly identified regulatory sites present attractive targets for pharmaceutical development, potentially enabling the modulation of autophagy initiation as a therapeutic strategy.

Conflict of interest
