---
pmid: '35512704'
title: Systematic discovery of mutation-directed neo-protein-protein interactions
  in cancer.
authors:
- Mo X
- Niu Q
- Ivanov AA
- Tsang YH
- Tang C
- Shu C
- Li Q
- Qian K
- Wahafu A
- Doyle SP
- Cicka D
- Yang X
- Fan D
- Reyna MA
- Cooper LAD
- Moreno CS
- Zhou W
- Owonikoko TK
- Lonial S
- Khuri FR
- Du Y
- Ramalingam SS
- Mills GB
- Fu H
journal: Cell
year: '2022'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC9597701
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2022.04.014
---

# Systematic discovery of mutation-directed neo-protein-protein interactions in cancer.
**Authors:** Mo X, Niu Q, Ivanov AA, Tsang YH, Tang C, Shu C, Li Q, Qian K, Wahafu A, Doyle SP, Cicka D, Yang X, Fan D, Reyna MA, Cooper LAD, Moreno CS, Zhou W, Owonikoko TK, Lonial S, Khuri FR, Du Y, Ramalingam SS, Mills GB, Fu H
**Journal:** Cell (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2022.04.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.04.014)
**PMC:** [PMC9597701](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9597701/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2022 May 26;185(11):1974-1985.e12. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2022.04.014. Epub
 2022 May 4.

Systematic discovery of mutation-directed neo-protein-protein interactions in 
cancer.

Mo X(1), Niu Q(2), Ivanov AA(3), Tsang YH(4), Tang C(5), Shu C(6), Li Q(2), Qian 
K(2), Wahafu A(7), Doyle SP(2), Cicka D(2), Yang X(8), Fan D(2), Reyna MA(9), 
Cooper LAD(10), Moreno CS(11), Zhou W(12), Owonikoko TK(13), Lonial S(13), Khuri 
FR(14), Du Y(3), Ramalingam SS(15), Mills GB(4), Fu H(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA; Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, 
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA; Emory Chemical Biology Discovery Center, Emory 
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA; Winship Cancer Institute 
of Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(4)Division of Oncologic Science, Oregon Health Sciences University School of 
Medicine, Portland, OR 97239, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA; Department of Urology, The First Affiliated 
Hospital, Medical School of Xi'An Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shannxi 710061, 
PRC.
(6)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA; Department of Gynecology, The Third Xiangya 
Hospital of Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410013, PRC.
(7)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA; Department of Neurosurgery, the First 
Affiliated Hospital of Xi'An Jiaotong University, Xi'an, PRC.
(8)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA; Emory Chemical Biology Discovery Center, Emory 
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(9)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Emory University School of Medicine, 
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(10)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(11)Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA; 
Department of Biomedical Informatics, Emory University School of Medicine, 
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory 
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(12)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA; Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, 
Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(13)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 
30322, USA.
(14)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 
30322, USA; Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology and 
Oncology, American University of Beirut, Beirut, 1107-2020, Lebanon.
(15)Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(16)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA; Emory Chemical Biology Discovery Center, Emory 
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA; Winship Cancer Institute 
of Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA; Department of Hematology and 
Medical Oncology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. Electronic address: 
hfu@emory.edu.

Comprehensive sequencing of patient tumors reveals genomic mutations across 
tumor types that enable tumorigenesis and progression. A subset of oncogenic 
driver mutations results in neomorphic activity where the mutant protein 
mediates functions not engaged by the parental molecule. Here, we identify 
prevalent variant-enabled neomorph-protein-protein interactions (neoPPI) with a 
quantitative high-throughput differential screening (qHT-dS) platform. The 
coupling of highly sensitive BRET biosensors with miniaturized coexpression in 
an ultra-HTS format allows large-scale monitoring of the interactions of 
wild-type and mutant variant counterparts with a library of cancer-associated 
proteins in live cells. The screening of 17,792 interactions with 2,172,864 data 
points revealed a landscape of gain of interactions encompassing both oncogenic 
and tumor suppressor mutations. For example, the recurrent BRAF V600E lesion 
mediates KEAP1 neoPPI, rewiring a BRAFV600E/KEAP1 signaling axis and creating 
collateral vulnerability to NQO1 substrates, offering a combination therapeutic 
strategy. Thus, cancer genomic alterations can create neo-interactions, 
informing variant-directed therapeutic approaches for precision medicine.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2022.04.014
PMCID: PMC9597701
PMID: 35512704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests H.F. is scientific 
founder of PiVista Therapeutics.

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Genomic mutation data provide a compelling structural framework to infer functional significance and to nominate potential cancer driver genes and therapeutic targets ( Hahn et al., 2021 ; Lawrence et al., 2014 ; Martinez-Jimenez et al., 2020 ; Schreiber et al., 2010 ). However, it is emerging that different driver mutations, even in the same cancer gene, can be functionally distinct with different clinical significance ( Burd et al., 2014 ; Chang et al., 2016 ; Menzies et al., 2012 ; Vivanco et al., 2012 ; Westcott et al., 2015 ). Therefore, translating this cancer mutation information into therapeutic applications at mutated amino acid level presents both an unprecedented challenge and opportunity for identifying mutant allele-specific targets, biomarkers, and therapeutic vulnerabilities.

Some mutations are found in driver genes that encode actionable targets, but the majority are located in genes without direct connection to known drugs, or in genes encoding “undruggables” such as adaptor proteins or tumor suppressors ( Ivanov et al., 2013 ; Vogelstein et al., 2013 ). These “undruggable” proteins exert their functions primarily through interactions with other cellular components through protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks ( Arkin et al., 2014 ; Ivanov et al., 2013 ; Li et al., 2017 ). Thus, understanding how cancer driver mutations are integrated within cellular signaling networks through altered PPIs may lead to potential strategies for pathway perturbation to reach the “undrugged” space of the cancer genome ( Fig. 1A ).

Missense mutations are common genetic alterations contributing to tumorigenesis. The mutant (MUT) alleles may create neo-epitopes on the encoded proteins ( Fig. 1A ). Such mutations may alter the intrinsic properties of the encoded proteins. It is also possible that those neo-epitopes may generate docking sites to induce neo-interactions, or act as impediments to weaken existing interactions. Such neo-epitope-triggered differential PPIs (Df-PPI) may dictate re-wired oncogenic programs that underlie the dysregulated growth and spread of tumor cells and may reveal much-needed tumor-specific molecular targets for therapeutic intervention. However, the prevalence and spectrum of neo-interactions triggered by mutations in oncogenes and tumor suppressors remains to be established. How to systematically discover those mutated residue-directed PPIs in a physiologically relevant cellular environment poses a major challenge.

To address these challenges, we established a BRET n technology-based differential PPI discovery platform that allows comparative screening of wild-type (WT) and MUT allele counterparts for detection of differential interactions with cancer-associated proteins in live mammalian cells ( Fig. 1B and S1 ). The high throughput and quantitative nature of the technology, termed q uantitative H igh T hroughput d ifferential S creening (qHT-dS), enabled the systematic identification of differential WT and MUT interaction proteins for 32 alleles from the examination of 17,792 pairs of potential PPIs. Analysis of high-stringency Df-PPI datasets revealed widespread gain-of-interactions induced by missense mutations of both oncogenes and tumor suppressors. Examination of mutation-directed neomorph PPIs (neoPPI) revealed potential alternative mechanisms and signaling pathways for well-studied mutated forms of oncogenes and tumor suppressors. The BRAF V600E /KEAP1 interaction was selected for validation using a panel of orthogonal assays that advanced it to a validated neoPPI status. This neoPPI redirects BRAF V600E to upregulate NRF2-mediated redox signaling while exposing a collateral therapeutic vulnerability for a combination strategy. Our qHT-dS platform enables the accelerated discovery of Df-PPIs at single mutated residue resolution with the resultant dataset serving as a resource for the biomedical community for precision oncology approaches.

DISCUSSION

Focusing on cancer driver mutations in this study for differential PPI discovery led to the emergence of a landscape where mutated residue-directed PPIs and pathways may rewire oncogenic programs to shape tumor phenotypes. A suite of neoPPI candidates have been revealed that suggest alternative mechanisms for well-characterized somatic aberrations. The presence of neo-interactions stemming from genomic mutations seems widespread. Also, neo-interactions were observed with different mutations in the same gene, or different alterations from the same residue, emphasizing the mutated residue-driven oncogenic programs ( Fig. 3 – 4 ). Such differential connectivity of diverse mutations may be important for varying clinical phenotypes and drug sensitivity. The suggested molecular pathways mediated by these neoPPI candidates may provide opportunities to address variant-associated tumor heterogeneity and therapeutic responses.

Our results strongly support the notion that a mutated residue of an oncogenic driver may be displayed as a neo-epitope, or an induced neo-epitope, to change the composition of binding complexes. It should be noted that a protein mutation could alter its 3D structure and/or protein stability ( Fig. S3B ), which rewires protein-protein interactions ( Sahni et al., 2015 ). The molecular basis for the identified neo-interactions requires structural studies of the neo-protein complexes. Functionally, such a neoepitope(s) may drive a “partner switching” in tumor suppressor genes, leading to not only the loss of tumor suppressor function, but also a gain of oncogenic potential, as shown for SPOP F133L and SMAD4 G386D ( Data S1 Fig. vi – v ). Thus, unexpected widespread gain-of-interaction neoPPIs with tumor suppressor mutations may provide actionable PPI targets for therapeutic intervention. Both Go-PPIs and Lo-PPIs identified may be targeted for therapeutic development through the discovery of neoPPI inhibitors or hypomorph-PPI inducers ( Tang et al., 2021 ).

The uncovered oncogenic mutation-mediated neoPPI candidates suggest mechanistic hypothesis to address observed clinical phenotypes of defined alterations. For example, the BRAF V600E /KEAP1 interaction informs potential ROS homeostasis pathway reprogramming ( Data S1 Fig. ii ). However, such mechanistic interpretations require in-depth neoPPI characterization and functional analysis. It is critical to verify the identified neoPPIs in relevant cancer types under the endogenous conditions to mitigate overexpression and tag-associated artifacts ( Fig. 4 ). We presented the BRAF V600E /KEAP1 interaction as a case study to advance our neoPPI candidate based on extensive interaction data including direct binding and those from BRAF V600E -carrying patient derived cancer cells. The dynamic interaction complex among BRAF V600E , KEAP1, and NRF2 demonstrates a potential mechanism by which BRAF V600E contributes to tumorigenesis and presents a promising molecular target for therapeutic intervention ( Fig. 6T ) ( Hintsala et al., 2016 ; Shirazi et al., 2020 ). The BRAF V600E /KEAP1 neoPPI-rewired pathway also exposes a potential vulnerability, leading to a sequential combination strategy for patients with BRAF V600E . Such therapeutic insights informed by the discovered BRAF V600E /KEAP1 neoPPI exemplifies the utility of neoPPIs as a starting point to reveal hidden pathway dependencies and vulnerabilities.

The recurrent neoPPI binding partners converge onto demonstrated core oncogenic pathways, including the cancer intrinsic JAK-STAT immune response pathway ( Zaretsky et al., 2016 ), providing a molecular basis for the oncogenic function of various driver mutations. On the other hand, driver mutations also generate distinct neoPPIs that may lead to divergent pathway rewiring, offering targets for precision therapy.

Our systematic discovery of mutant-induced neoPPI candidates is enabled by the qHT-dS platform that permits the identification of Df-PPIs at single amino acid resolution. This PPI detection approach emphasizes the quality of the PPI data from CARINA analysis of binary titration and quadruplicate samples and the quantitative nature for cancer-focused differential PPI mapping in physiologically relevant environment, complementing the computational, AP-MS and Y2H technologies for proteome scale studies ( Cheng et al., 2021 ; Do et al., 2012 ; Sahni et al., 2015 ). In comparison to human interactome datasets, such as BioGRID and BioPlex v2 ( Oughtred et al., 2018 ; Rolland et al., 2014 ), the qHT-dS PPI profiling has also significantly expanded the connectivity within the OncoPPI space.

Together, our results support the concept of mutation-driven oncogenic pathway rewiring through mutant allele-enabled PPIs. The experimentally validated neoPPI candidates provide a mechanistic basis to generate testable hypothesis to further examine their functional significance. Such mutation-dictated PPIs may not only enhance our understanding of molecular reprograming in cancer, but also reveal potential ways to target tumor variant-mediated mechanisms for therapeutic intervention, which may be applicable to genomic alterations in both oncogenes and tumor suppressors. The presented Df-PPI dataset and the neoPPI candidates from our quantitative screening platform, bioinformatics and experimental annotation, and confirmative studies offer the scientific community a valuable resource for variant-directed molecular interaction studies to accelerate the precision medicine approach.
