---
pmid: '16167335'
title: 'Overexpression of regucalcin suppresses apoptotic cell death in cloned normal
  rat kidney proximal tubular epithelial NRK52E cells: change in apoptosis-related
  gene expression.'
authors:
- Nakagawa T
- Yamaguchi M
journal: J Cell Biochem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/jcb.20617
---

# Overexpression of regucalcin suppresses apoptotic cell death in cloned normal rat kidney proximal tubular epithelial NRK52E cells: change in apoptosis-related gene expression.
**Authors:** Nakagawa T, Yamaguchi M
**Journal:** J Cell Biochem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcb.20617](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcb.20617)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Dec 15;96(6):1274-85. doi: 10.1002/jcb.20617.

Overexpression of regucalcin suppresses apoptotic cell death in cloned normal 
rat kidney proximal tubular epithelial NRK52E cells: change in apoptosis-related 
gene expression.

Nakagawa T(1), Yamaguchi M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology and Molecular Metabolism, Graduate School of 
Nutritional Sciences, University of Shizuoka, 52-1 Yada, Suruga-ku, Shizuoka 
422-8526, Japan.

The effect of regucalcin, a regulatory protein in intracellular signaling 
pathway, on cell death and apoptosis was investigated using the cloned normal 
rat kidney proximal tubular epithelial NRK52E cells overexpressing regucalcin. 
NRK52E cells (wild type) and stable regucalcin (RC)/pCXN2 transfectants were 
cultured for 72 h in a medium containing 5% bovine serum (BS) to obtain 
subconfluent monolayers. After culture for 72 h, cells were further cultured for 
24-72 h in a medium without BS containing either vehicle, tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha; 0.1 or 1.0 ng/ml of medium), lipopolysaccharide (LPS; 
0.1 or 1.0 microg/ml), Bay K 8644 (10(-9)-10(-7) M), or thapsigargin 
(10(-9)-10(-7) M). The number of wild-type cells was significantly decreased by 
culture for 42-72 h in the presence of TNF-alpha (0.1 or 1.0 ng/ml), LPS (0.1 or 
1.0 microg/ml), Bay K 8644 (10(-7)-10(-5) M), or thapsigargin (10(-8) or 10(-7) 
M). The effect of TNF-alpha (0.1 or 1.0 ng/ml), LPS (0.1 or 1.0 microg/ml), Bay 
K 8644 (10(-7)-10(-6) M), or thapsigargin (10(-7) M) in decreasing the number of 
wild-type cells cultured for 24-72 h was significantly prevented in 
transfectants overexpressing regucalcin. Agarose gel electrophoresis showed the 
presence of low-molecular-weight deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) fragments of 
adherent wild-type cells cultured with LPS (1.0 microg/ml), Bay K 8644 (10(-7) 
M), or thapsigargin (10(-8) M) for 24 h, and this DNA fragmentation was 
significantly suppressed in transfectants. DNA fragmentation in adherent cells 
was not seen by culture with TNF-alpha (1.0 ng/ml). TNF-alpha-induced decrease 
in the number of wild-type cells was significantly prevented by culture with 
caspase-3 inhibitor (10(-8) M), while LPS- or Bay K 8644-induced decrease in 
cell number was significantly prevented by caspase-3 inhibitor or N 
omega-nitro-L-arginine methylester (NAME) (10(-5) M), an inhibitor of nitric 
oxide (NO) synthase. Thapsigargin-induced decrease in cell number was not 
prevented in the presence of two inhibitors. Bcl-2 and Akt-1 mRNA levels were 
significantly increased in transfectants cultured for 24 h as compared with 
those of wild-type cells, while Apaf-1, caspase-3, or 
glyceroaldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (G3PDH) mRNA expressions were not 
significantly changed in transfectants. Culture with TNF-alpha (1.0 ng/ml), LPS 
(1.0 microg/ml), Bay K 8644 (l0(-7) M), or thapsigargin (10(-8) M) caused a 
significant increase in caspase-3 mRNA levels in wild-type cells. LPS (1.0 
microg/ml) significantly decreased Bcl-2 mRNA expression in the cells. Their 
effects on the gene expression of apoptosis-related proteins were not 
significantly changed in transfectants. This study demonstrates that 
overexpression of regucalcin has a suppressive effect on cell death and 
apoptosis induced by various factors which their action are mediated through 
many intracellular signaling pathways, and that it modulates the gene expression 
of apoptosis-related proteins.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.20617
PMID: 16167335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
