---
pmid: '10892653'
title: Drosophila Dscam is an axon guidance receptor exhibiting extraordinary molecular
  diversity.
authors:
- Schmucker D
- Clemens JC
- Shu H
- Worby CA
- Xiao J
- Muda M
- Dixon JE
- Zipursky SL
journal: Cell
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80878-8
---

# Drosophila Dscam is an axon guidance receptor exhibiting extraordinary molecular diversity.
**Authors:** Schmucker D, Clemens JC, Shu H, Worby CA, Xiao J, Muda M, Dixon JE, Zipursky SL
**Journal:** Cell (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80878-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80878-8)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2000 Jun 9;101(6):671-84. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80878-8.

Drosophila Dscam is an axon guidance receptor exhibiting extraordinary molecular 
diversity.

Schmucker D(1), Clemens JC, Shu H, Worby CA, Xiao J, Muda M, Dixon JE, Zipursky 
SL.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biological Chemistry, UCLA 
School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

A Drosophila homolog of human Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule (DSCAM), an 
immunoglobulin superfamily member, was isolated by its affinity to Dock, an 
SH3/SH2 adaptor protein required for axon guidance. Dscam binds directly to both 
Dock's SH2 and SH3 domains. Genetic studies revealed that Dscam, Dock and Pak, a 
serine/threonine kinase, act together to direct pathfinding of Bolwig's nerve, 
containing a subclass of sensory axons, to an intermediate target in the embryo. 
Dscam also is required for the formation of axon pathways in the embryonic 
central nervous system. cDNA and genomic analyses reveal the existence of 
multiple forms of Dscam with a conserved architecture containing variable Ig and 
transmembrane domains. Alternative splicing can potentially generate more than 
38,000 Dscam isoforms. This molecular diversity may contribute to the 
specificity of neuronal connectivity.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80878-8
PMID: 10892653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
