---
pmid: '10888872'
title: DNMT1 binds HDAC2 and a new co-repressor, DMAP1, to form a complex at replication
  foci.
authors:
- Rountree MR
- Bachman KE
- Baylin SB
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/77023
---

# DNMT1 binds HDAC2 and a new co-repressor, DMAP1, to form a complex at replication foci.
**Authors:** Rountree MR, Bachman KE, Baylin SB
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/77023](https://doi.org/10.1038/77023)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 2000 Jul;25(3):269-77. doi: 10.1038/77023.

DNMT1 binds HDAC2 and a new co-repressor, DMAP1, to form a complex at 
replication foci.

Rountree MR(1), Bachman KE, Baylin SB.

Author information:
(1)The Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Tumor Biology Laboratory, The Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. 
rountree@jhmi.edu

DNA methylation can contribute to transcriptional silencing through several 
transcriptionally repressive complexes, which include methyl-CpG binding domain 
proteins (MBDs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs). We show here that the chief 
enzyme that maintains mammalian DNA methylation, DNMT1, can also establish a 
repressive transcription complex. The non-catalytic amino terminus of DNMT1 
binds to HDAC2 and a new protein, DMAP1 (for DNMT1 associated protein), and can 
mediate transcriptional repression. DMAP1 has intrinsic transcription repressive 
activity, and binds to the transcriptional co-repressor TSG101. DMAP1 is 
targeted to replication foci through interaction with the far N terminus of 
DNMT1 throughout S phase, whereas HDAC2 joins DNMT1 and DMAP1 only during late S 
phase, providing a platform for how histones may become deacetylated in 
heterochromatin following replication. Thus, DNMT1 not only maintains DNA 
methylation, but also may directly target, in a heritable manner, 
transcriptionally repressive chromatin to the genome during DNA replication.

DOI: 10.1038/77023
PMID: 10888872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
