---
pmid: '18945896'
title: Swiss Cheese, a protein involved in progressive neurodegeneration, acts as
  a noncanonical regulatory subunit for PKA-C3.
authors:
- Bettencourt da Cruz A
- Wentzell J
- Kretzschmar D
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2723165
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3015-08.2008
---

# Swiss Cheese, a protein involved in progressive neurodegeneration, acts as a noncanonical regulatory subunit for PKA-C3.
**Authors:** Bettencourt da Cruz A, Wentzell J, Kretzschmar D
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3015-08.2008](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3015-08.2008)
**PMC:** [PMC2723165](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2723165/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2008 Oct 22;28(43):10885-92. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3015-08.2008.

Swiss Cheese, a protein involved in progressive neurodegeneration, acts as a 
noncanonical regulatory subunit for PKA-C3.

Bettencourt da Cruz A(1), Wentzell J, Kretzschmar D.

Author information:
(1)Center for Research on Occupational and Environmental Toxicology, Oregon 
Health & Sciences University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA.

The Drosophila Swiss Cheese (SWS) protein and its vertebrate ortholog Neuropathy 
Target Esterase (NTE) are required for neuronal survival and glial integrity. In 
humans, NTE is the target of organophosphorous compounds which cause a 
paralyzing axonal degeneration and recently mutations in NTE have been shown to 
cause a Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia called NTE-related Motor-Neuron Disorder. 
SWS and NTE are concentrated in the endoplasmic reticulum and both have been 
shown to have an esterase function against an artificial substrate. However, the 
functional mechanisms and the pathways in which SWS/NTE are involved in are 
still widely unknown. Here, we show that SWS interacts specifically with the C3 
catalytic subunit of cAMP activated protein kinase (PKA-C3), which together with 
orthologs in mouse (Pkare) and human (PrKX) forms a novel class of catalytic 
subunits of unknown function. This interaction requires a domain of SWS which 
shows homology to regulatory subunits of PKA and, like conventional regulatory 
subunits, the binding of SWS to the PKA-C3 inhibits its function. Consistent 
with this result, expression of additional PKA-C3 induces degeneration and 
enhances the neurodegenerative phenotype in sws mutants. We also show that the 
complex formation with the membrane-bound SWS tethers PKA-C3 to membranes. We 
therefore propose a model in which SWS acts as a noncanonical subunit for 
PKA-C3, whereby the complex formation regulates the localization and kinase 
activity of PKA-C3, and that disruption of this regulation can induce 
neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3015-08.2008
PMCID: PMC2723165
PMID: 18945896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The Drosophila Swiss Cheese (SWS) protein and its vertebrate ortholog Neuropathy Target Esterase (NTE) are required for neuronal survival and glial integrity. In humans, NTE is the target of organophosphorous compounds which cause a paralyzing axonal degeneration and recently mutations in NTE have been shown to cause a Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia called NTE-related Motor-Neuron Disorder. SWS and NTE are concentrated in the endoplasmic reticulum and both have been shown to have an esterase function against an artificial substrate. However, the functional mechanisms and the pathways in which SWS/NTE are involved in are still widely unknown. Here, we show that SWS interacts specifically with the C3 catalytic subunit of cAMP activated protein kinase (PKA-C3), which together with orthologs in mouse (Pkare) and human (PrKX) forms a novel class of catalytic subunits of unknown function. This interaction requires a domain of SWS which shows homology to regulatory subunits of PKA and, like conventional regulatory subunits, the binding of SWS to the PKA-C3 inhibits its function. Consistent with this result, expression of additional PKA-C3 induces degeneration and enhances the neurodegenerative phenotype in sws mutants. We also show that the complex formation with the membrane-bound SWS tethers PKA-C3 to membranes. We therefore propose a model in which SWS acts as a noncanonical subunit for PKA-C3, whereby the complex formation regulates the localization and kinase activity of PKA-C3, and that disruption of this regulation can induce neurodegeneration.

Introduction

Swiss-cheese ( sws ) mutant flies show age-dependent neurodegeneration, glial hyperwrapping, and neuronal apoptosis ( Kretzschmar et al., 1997 ). SWS is the ortholog of vertebrate Neuropathy Target Esterase (NTE) (supplemental Fig. 1, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material) ( Lush et al., 1998 ; Moser et al., 2000 ), which plays an important role in organophosphate (OP)-induced delayed neuropathy (OPIDN), occurring after intoxication with organophosphorous compounds ( Glynn, 2000 ; Moretto, 2000 ) found in pesticides and nerve agents ( Lotti and Moretto, 2005 ). OPIDN, which has first been described after a poisoning epidemic in the southern United States ( Smith et al., 1930 ), is characterized by degeneration of long axons in the central and peripheral nervous systems ( Ehrich and Jortner, 2001 ). Recently, mutations in human NTE have also been shown to cause a Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia called NTE-Related Motor-Neuron Disorder ( Rainier et al., 2008 ). Mice lacking NTE show severe growth retardation and die approximately on day 9 of embryonic development ( Moser et al., 2004 ), whereas neuronal specific NTE knock-out mice show a strikingly similar phenotype to sws mutants, including vacuolization, abnormal myelin figures, and neuronal death ( Akassoglou et al., 2004 ). We have also shown that these proteins are functionally conserved because mouse NTE can completely replace SWS in Drosophila ( Mühlig-Versen et al., 2005 ).

Both, SWS and mouse NTE are widely expressed in the nervous system with a more restricted pattern to large neurons in older animals ( Moser et al., 2000 ; Mühlig-Versen et al., 2005 ). Both have been localized to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) ( Akassoglou et al., 2004 ; Mühlig-Versen et al., 2005 ) and Li et al. (2003) described that NTE transfected into COS cells is inserted into ER membranes with most of it exposed on the cytoplasmic face.

NTE and SWS exhibit esterase activity against the artificial substrate phenyl-valerate ( Johnson, 1977 ; Mühlig-Versen et al., 2005 ), which requires a serine residue within a highly conserved domain. A point mutation in this serine in SWS abolishes esterase activity and interferes with the function of SWS in vivo ( Mühlig-Versen et al., 2005 ). In addition, SWS contains several regions that show homology to the regulatory subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). One of these regions contains a tandem cyclic nucleotide binding site found in canonical regulatory subunits, whereas a third consists of a single cyclic nucleotide binding site (supplemental Figs. 2, 3, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material). The forth region shows homology to the motif required for the interaction of the regulatory subunit with the catalytic subunit of PKA, including the pseudosubstrate site ( Kretzschmar et al., 1997 ). PKA holoenzymes are tetramers consisting of two catalytic and two regulatory subunits, which are activated by dissociation of the regulatory subunits allowing the catalytic subunits to unfold their kinase activity ( Francis et al., 2002 ; Taylor et al., 2005 ). The binding between the subunits is mediated by the pseudosubstrate site which resembles the R-R-X-S-X consensus site found in PKA substrates ( Poteet-Smith et al., 1997 ). In this study, we show that SWS acts similar to regulatory subunits specifically binding PKA-C3, and we show that this interaction plays a role in the neurodegenerative phenotype of sws .

Discussion

Our results show that SWS binds specifically to PKA-C3, inhibiting its catalytic function, similar to the inhibitory function of canonical regulatory subunits. The binding is mediated by the N-terminally localized interaction domain of SWS which contains a site, the pseudosubstrate site, that is shared by all types of canonical regulatory subunits ( Poteet-Smith et al., 1997 ). As we have shown, a mutation in one of the conserved arginines in the pseudosubstrate site reduces the binding capacity of SWS for PKA-C3, similar to the decreased binding observed with comparable mutations in vertebrate canonical regulatory subunits ( Buechler et al., 1993 ; Poteet-Smith et al., 1997 ). In addition, we verified that the interaction between SWS and PKA-C3 is of biological relevance because expression of the construct with the mutated pseudosubstrate site (SWS R133A ) only partially restores the function of SWS in sws 1 mutant flies. Surprisingly, we found that SWS R133A does not exhibit significant esterase activity in the sws 1 background, although it has an intact esterase domain, suggesting that the interaction between SWS and PKA-C3 has a dual function: regulating the kinase activity of PKA-C3 and the esterase activity of SWS.

In addition, the binding of PKA-C3 to the transmembrane protein SWS also regulates the subcellular localization of PKA-C3; although PKA-C3 is found in membrane fractions in wild-type flies, it is missing in membranes from sw s mutants. For canonical PKA complexes it has been shown that the spatial regulation plays an important role for the function because it ensures that PKA is exposed to localized cAMP gradients within a cell, which then allows accurate substrate selection ( Michel and Scott, 2002 ). Although the targeting of canonical PKA complexes to different cellular compartments is also regulated by the regulatory subunits, in canonical complexes it is controlled by binding of the regulatory subunit to various A kinase-anchoring proteins ( Feliciello et al., 2001 ; Michel and Scott, 2002 ) and is not a direct consequence of the localization of the regulatory subunit itself.

The regulatory subunits of PKA are not only controlling the localization of the complex but also the activation of its kinase function by binding cAMP, which results in the release of the catalytic subunit ( Taylor et al., 2005 ). As shown in supplemental Figures 2 and 3, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material, SWS as well as its human and mouse orthologs, contain three cyclic nucleotide binding sites; a tandem binding site similar to the one found in canonical regulatory subunits and an additional single site. Interestingly, this single site resembles more a cGMP binding site because, both SWS and NTE contain a threonine instead of an alanine within this motif (highlighted in supplemental Fig. 3 A , available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material), which is typical for cAMP binding sites ( Shabb et al., 1990 ). In addition, the third binding site in SWS also has a threonine (whereas NTE has an alanine, highlighted in supplemental Fig. 3 B , available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material), suggesting that the complex formation of SWS and PKA-C3 may be regulated by cGMP. However, it has been shown that cyclic nucleotide binding sites can also bind to other ligands, including heme in the bacterial transcription factor cooA subfamily ( Lanzilotta et al., 2000 ) and ortho-chlorophenolic compounds in the bacterial transcriptional regulators CprK ( Kannan et al., 2007 ). Future experiments will determine whether and which compound the three cyclic nucleotide binding sites of SWS can bind.

In addition to identifying this novel PKA complex, our results also describe for the first time a function for the unique C3 subunit. PKA-C3 has been identified as a catalytic subunit by its homology to the well characterized PKA-C1 subunit ( Kalderon and Rubin, 1988 ). Comparing PKA-C3 with the other two catalytic subunits found in Drosophila showed that it is more closely related to the C1 subunit (7e -103 ) than to C2 (3e -70 ) (supplemental Fig. 6, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material), but studies expressing PKA-C3 under the control of the PKA-C1 promoter have indicated that PKA-C3 is not functionally redundant with PKA-C1 ( Meléndez et al., 1995 ).

PKA-C3 shares 62% identity in the catalytic core region with the recently isolated X-linked protein kinases in mouse (Pkare) and human (PrKX) ( Blaschke et al., 2000 ; Diskar et al., 2007 ). Notably, the homology between the human and fly proteins is actually higher than between the different catalytic subunits from any one species ( Zimmermann et al., 1999 ). Comparing PKA-C3 with human PrKX provided an E-value of 7e -125 and PKA-C1 has an even higher homology to human PKA-Ca (7e -174 ) (supplemental Fig. 7, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material). It was therefore suggested that these unique catalytic subunits represent a novel class of evolutionary conserved PKAs.

Here we show that PKA-C3 is expressed in the nervous system, with very high levels in distinct large neurons, suggesting a function in the adult nervous system. This was verified by our results that additional PKA-C3 enhances the neuronal degeneration observed in sws 1 , whereas removing one copy of the PKA-C3 gene suppresses degeneration, confirming a neuronal function. This neuroprotective function could be solely mediated by its effects on SWS, alternatively PKA-C3 can directly induce neurodegeneration. The latter is supported by our findings that overexpression of PKA-C3 in neurons resulted in a weak but readily detectable degenerative phenotype, whereas it did not affect the esterase function of SWS. In addition, an SWS construct without esterase activity but an intact pseudosubstrate site, allowing binding and inhibition of PKA-C3, can still partially rescue the degenerative phenotype of sws 1 . Finally, removing one copy of the proposed inhibitor SWS in PKA-C3 overexpressing flies, enhanced the PKA-C3 induced neurodegeneration. Therefore, we propose that SWS acts as a noncanonical regulatory subunit that inhibits the catalytic activity of PKA-C3, and that the disruption of this inhibitory mechanism results in the uncontrolled release of active PKA-C3 which damages the nervous system.

Because mouse Pkare mRNA is also expressed in many regions of the adult nervous system, including hypothalamus, hippocampus, cerebellum, and olfactory bulb ( Blaschke et al., 2000 ) while the human Pkare protein was shown to be highly expressed in brain ( Li et al., 2005 ). Together with our data, that PKA-C3 plays a role in progressive neurodegeneration, this suggests that this novel class of catalytic subunits may have a specific function in the maintenance of the nervous system conserved between flies and mammals.
