---
pmid: '22156209'
title: Restriction of histone gene transcription to S phase by phosphorylation of
  a chromatin boundary protein.
authors:
- Kurat CF
- Lambert JP
- van Dyk D
- Tsui K
- van Bakel H
- Kaluarachchi S
- Friesen H
- Kainth P
- Nislow C
- Figeys D
- Fillingham J
- Andrews BJ
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3243059
doi: 10.1101/gad.173427.111
---

# Restriction of histone gene transcription to S phase by phosphorylation of a chromatin boundary protein.
**Authors:** Kurat CF, Lambert JP, van Dyk D, Tsui K, van Bakel H, Kaluarachchi S, Friesen H, Kainth P, Nislow C, Figeys D, Fillingham J, Andrews BJ
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.173427.111](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.173427.111)
**PMC:** [PMC3243059](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3243059/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2011 Dec 1;25(23):2489-501. doi: 10.1101/gad.173427.111.

Restriction of histone gene transcription to S phase by phosphorylation of a 
chromatin boundary protein.

Kurat CF(1), Lambert JP, van Dyk D, Tsui K, van Bakel H, Kaluarachchi S, Friesen 
H, Kainth P, Nislow C, Figeys D, Fillingham J, Andrews BJ.

Author information:
(1)The Donnelly Center, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E1, Canada.

The cell cycle-regulated expression of core histone genes is required for DNA 
replication and proper cell cycle progression in eukaryotic cells. Although some 
factors involved in histone gene transcription are known, the molecular 
mechanisms that ensure proper induction of histone gene expression during S 
phase remain enigmatic. Here we demonstrate that S-phase transcription of the 
model histone gene HTA1 in yeast is regulated by a novel attach-release 
mechanism involving phosphorylation of the conserved chromatin boundary protein 
Yta7 by both cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (Cdk1) and casein kinase 2 (CK2). Outside 
S phase, integrity of the AAA-ATPase domain is required for Yta7 boundary 
function, as defined by correct positioning of the histone chaperone Rtt106 and 
the chromatin remodeling complex RSC. Conversely, in S phase, Yta7 is 
hyperphosphorylated, causing its release from HTA1 chromatin and productive 
transcription. Most importantly, abrogation of Yta7 phosphorylation results in 
constitutive attachment of Yta7 to HTA1 chromatin, preventing efficient 
transcription post-recruitment of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII). Our study 
identified the chromatin boundary protein Yta7 as a key regulator that links 
S-phase kinases with RNAPII function at cell cycle-regulated histone gene 
promoters.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.173427.111
PMCID: PMC3243059
PMID: 22156209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The cell cycle-regulated expression of core histone genes is required for DNA replication and proper cell cycle progression in eukaryotic cells. Although some factors involved in histone gene transcription are known, the molecular mechanisms that ensure proper induction of histone gene expression during S phase remain enigmatic. Here we demonstrate that S-phase transcription of the model histone gene HTA1 in yeast is regulated by a novel attach–release mechanism involving phosphorylation of the conserved chromatin boundary protein Yta7 by both cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (Cdk1) and casein kinase 2 (CK2). Outside S phase, integrity of the AAA-ATPase domain is required for Yta7 boundary function, as defined by correct positioning of the histone chaperone Rtt106 and the chromatin remodeling complex RSC. Conversely, in S phase, Yta7 is hyperphosphorylated, causing its release from HTA1 chromatin and productive transcription. Most importantly, abrogation of Yta7 phosphorylation results in constitutive attachment of Yta7 to HTA1 chromatin, preventing efficient transcription post-recruitment of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII). Our study identified the chromatin boundary protein Yta7 as a key regulator that links S-phase kinases with RNAPII function at cell cycle-regulated histone gene promoters.

Discussion

Cell cycle-regulated expression of core histone genes is critical for maintaining the delicate balance between histone and DNA synthesis that is required for proper genome replication and cell division. Although a number of factors involved in histone transcription have been identified, molecular mechanisms linking histone gene expression to cell cycle regulators have remained obscure. Here we provide substantial evidence that the conserved AAA-ATPase domain-containing chromatin boundary protein Yta7 is a master regulator of core histone gene transcription and a conduit for signals from cell cycle kinases to the transcription machinery ( Fig. 7 ): (1) Yta7 and subunits of RNAPII functionally interact, and both are recruited to the core histone HTA1 locus in a cell cycle-dependent manner. (2) Integrity of the AAA-ATPase domain in Yta7 is important for boundary function, which is necessary for appropriate repression of histone gene expression outside of S phase. (3) Phosphorylation of the N terminus of Yta7 by G1–S-phase-specific forms of Cdk1 and by CK2 inhibits chromatin binding of Yta7 at HTA1 , causing its dissociation. (4) Dissociation of Yta7 from chromatin is necessary for RNAPII promoter escape and HTA1 transcript elongation, which in turn is essential for proper cell cycle progression. We propose that the Yta7 boundary protein temporally coordinates mutually exclusive domains of either repressed or accessible chromatin, ensuring appropriate cell cycle regulation of histone gene expression.

How does Yta7 function as a boundary protein at HTA1 ? We showed that Yta7 boundary function, as defined by its regulation of Rtt106 localization, is dependent on its canonical AAA-ATPase domain. The AAA-ATPase family is composed of a large and functionally diverse group of proteins that hydrolyzes ATP to induce conformational changes in substrate proteins ( Hanson and Whiteheart 2005 ). Mutation of the AAA-ATPase domain of Yta7 caused spreading of the Rtt106 histone chaperone and the RSC complex through the HTA1 coding region, a phenomenon that we also observed for Rtt106 in a yta7 deletion strain ( Fillingham et al. 2009 ). These and other results suggest that the AAA-ATPase domain of Yta7 is required for its function as a boundary protein, preventing the ectopic presence of Rtt106, RSC, and associated repressive chromatin through the coding region of HTA1 . Consistent with this idea, decreased HTA1 transcription in the yta7-K460A mutant was suppressed by eliminating Rtt106 ( Fig. 3E ).

As noted earlier, a recent study affirmed the important role for Rtt106 at the histone loci through all stages of the cell cycle via its recruitment of two chromatin remodeling complexes: SWI/SNF and RSC ( Ferreira et al. 2011 ). Whereas SWI/SNF is required for histone gene activation during S phase ( Dimova et al. 1999 ; Xu et al. 2005 ; Ferreira et al. 2011 ), RSC is implicated in histone gene repression outside of S phase. Rtt106 also functions upstream of SIR-based silencing at telomeric heterchromatin ( Huang et al. 2007 ), but repression of HTA1 is unlikely to be SIR-dependent, since we observed no recruitment of Sir3-TAP to HTA1 chromatin (Supplemental Fig. 5). These data and our new observations illuminate a possible mechanism of Rtt106-mediated silencing of histone gene expression. We propose that Rtt106 recruits RSC outside of S phase to help position nucleosomes over histone gene promoters, blocking recruitment of RNAPII. This may occur indirectly via occlusion of TFIID binding to the TATA-box (recruitment of TBP to the HTA1 promoter happens in a cell cycle-dependent manner [J Fillingham and J Greenblatt, unpubl.]). Activation of histone gene expression in late G1/S then occurs via Rtt106-mediated recruitment of SWI/SNF, which removes nucleosomes over the promoter, permitting recruitment of RNAPII.

The presence of Yta7 at histone genes is correlated with periods of the cell cycle outside of S phase when histone gene expression is repressed. This result suggests that the boundary activity of Yta7 must be relieved during G1–S phase in order for histone gene expression to be induced. We made several observations that implicate G1–S-phase-specific forms of Cdk1 and CK2 in Yta7 regulation, allowing the timely activation of histone gene expression: (1) Yta7 genetically interacts with G1–S-phase-specific Cdk1 cyclins and with CK2 and physically interacts with all four subunits of CK2. (2) Yta7 is phosphorylated in a cell cycle-dependent manner, with peak phosphorylation during the G1–S-phase transition, and phosphorylation is reduced in mutants compromised for Cdk1 or CK2 activity. (3) Mutant versions of Yta7 lacking potential Cdk1 and CK2 phosphorylation ( yta7-6A , yta7-7A , and yta7-13A ) sites do not dissociate properly from the HTA1 promoter and prevent induction of histone gene expression during S phase. (4) Yta7 is an in vitro substrate for both Cdk1 and CK2. These and other observations lead us to propose that S-phase phosphorylation of Yta7 by Cdk1 and Ck2 is required to eject Yta7 from chromatin, relieving boundary activity and stimulating expression of HTA1 .

Our results further suggest that the phosphorylation and eviction of Yta7 does not reflect a role for Yta7 in RNAPII recruitment to the HTA1 promoter; indeed, Yta7 appears to have a stimulatory role in RNAPII recruitment, and Yta7 and RNAPII can be copurified on chromatin ( Fig. 2A,B ). Instead, our data suggest that the sustained presence of Yta7 throughout S phase at histone promoters may interfere with elongation through improper recruitment of the FACT and RSC complexes to HTA1 chromatin. The FACT complex physically interacts with Yta7 on chromatin ( Fig. 2B ) and localizes to the HTA1 coding region ( Fig. 6D ; Fillingham et al. 2009 ). We observed increased FACT localization to the HTA1 ORF in a yta7-13A mutant ( Fig. 6D ), suggesting that phosphorylation of Yta7 may permit release of the Yta7–FACT complex, allowing efficient RNAPII elongation through HTA1 ( Fig. 7 ). Like FACT, the RSC complex also physically interacts with Yta7 on chromatin ( Fig. 2B ), but, unlike FACT, it localizes to the HTA1 regulatory region. We saw increased RSC localization to the HTA1 regulatory region in a yta7-13A mutant during S phase when it is not normally present. We therefore propose that S-phase-specific transcription of histone genes reflects the presence of repressive chromatin at histone loci that is maintained by FACT and RSC outside of S phase, which interferes with efficient transcription by RNAPII.

Cdk1 is the major Cdk in yeast and regulates numerous cellular processes, including transcription. Although a connection between S-phase Cdk1 activity and histone gene transcription seems intuitive, to date, no protein involved in histone transcription has been identified as a Cdk1 substrate in yeast. In contrast, at least some activators of histone gene transcription are phosphorylated and activated by CDKs in mammals. In human cells, cyclin E–CDK2 colocalizes with the NPAT proteins to histone gene clusters in subnuclear Cajal bodies ( Ma et al. 2000 ; Zhao et al. 2000 ). Notably, phosphorylation of NPAT by cyclin E–CDK2 activates histone gene transcription at the G1/S transition ( Zhao et al. 1998 , 2000 ; Ma et al. 2000 ; Ye et al. 2003 ). However, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain to be identified.

CK2 is a multifunctional kinase with known roles in transcription and RNA processing. In higher eukaryotes, one-third of CK2 substrates are involved in gene expression; half of those are transcription factors ( Meggio and Pinna 2003 ). In yeast, CK2 physically interacts with the PAF and FACT complexes, both involved in RNAPII transcript elongation ( Gavin et al. 2006 ; Krogan et al. 2006 ). Also, the RNAPII elongation factors Spt4 and Spt5, which also localize to HTA1 (Supplemental Fig. 5), are phosphorylated by CK2 in vivo ( Krogan et al. 2002 ). However, the functional consequences of these phosphorylation events remain unclear. More recently it was shown that phosphorylation of the SR-like protein Npl3 by CK2 influences RNAPII-dependent elongation ( Dermody et al. 2008 ). Although CK2 activity is not known to be cell cycle-regulated, our data suggest that phosphorylation of Yta7 by CK2 may be an important facet of regulation of transcript elongation by CK2, perhaps following a priming event involving phosphorylation of Yta7 by Cdk1.

Our study provides a detailed analysis of regulation of cell cycle-dependent histone gene transcription through phosphorylation of the chromatin boundary element Yta7 by S forms of Cdk1 and CK2. As overexpression of a yta7 phosphomutant is highly toxic and Yta7 localizes also to numerous other loci ( Gradolatto et al. 2008 ), we propose that S-phase-specific regulation of Yta7 by Cdk1 and CK2 may be a mechanism that is broadly applied throughout the genome to regulate gene transcription. Interestingly, the human homolog of Yta7, ATAD2, is involved in chromatin dynamics and transcriptional activities and is up-regulated predominantly in G1/S-phase cells, consistent with a possible role in DNA replication and histone synthesis ( Ciro et al. 2009 ; Caron et al. 2010 ). Like Yta7, ATAD2 is phosphorylated at CK and CDK consensus sites ( Gnad et al. 2007 ), and overexpression of ATAD2 strongly correlates with poor prognosis and rapid mortality in lung and breast cancer patients ( Caron et al. 2010 ; Kalashnikova et al. 2010 ). We suggest that further analysis of the Yta7 pathway in yeast will shed light on regulation by ATAD2 in mammalian cells and illuminate conserved pathways controlling regulatory chromatin domains throughout the eukaryotic genome.
