---
pmid: '16183742'
title: Apoptosis caused by p53-induced protein with death domain (PIDD) depends on
  the death adapter protein RAIDD.
authors:
- Berube C
- Boucher LM
- Ma W
- Wakeham A
- Salmena L
- Hakem R
- Yeh WC
- Mak TW
- Benchimol S
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2005'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC1242316
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0506475102
---

# Apoptosis caused by p53-induced protein with death domain (PIDD) depends on the death adapter protein RAIDD.
**Authors:** Berube C, Boucher LM, Ma W, Wakeham A, Salmena L, Hakem R, Yeh WC, Mak TW, Benchimol S
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0506475102](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506475102)
**PMC:** [PMC1242316](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1242316/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Oct 4;102(40):14314-20. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0506475102. Epub 2005 Sep 23.

Apoptosis caused by p53-induced protein with death domain (PIDD) depends on the 
death adapter protein RAIDD.

Berube C(1), Boucher LM, Ma W, Wakeham A, Salmena L, Hakem R, Yeh WC, Mak TW, 
Benchimol S.

Author information:
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute/Princess Margaret Hospital, 610 University Avenue, 
Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 2M9.

The p53 tumor suppressor promotes cell cycle arrest or apoptosis in response to 
diverse stress stimuli. p53-mediated cell death depends in large part on 
transcriptional up-regulation of target genes. One of these targets, P53-induced 
protein with a death domain (PIDD), was shown to function as a mediator of 
p53-dependent apoptosis. Here we show that PIDD is a cytoplasmic protein, and 
that PIDD-induced apoptosis and growth suppression in embryonic fibroblasts 
depend on the adaptor protein receptor-interacting protein (RIP)-associated 
ICH-1/CED-3 homologous protein with a death domain (RAIDD). We provide evidence 
that PIDD-induced cell death is associated with the early activation of 
caspase-2 and later activation of caspase-3 and -7. Our results also show that 
caspase-2(-/-), in contrast to RAIDD(-/-), mouse embryonic fibroblasts, are only 
partially resistant to PIDD. Our findings suggest that caspase-2 contributes to 
PIDD-mediated cell death, but that it is not the sole effector of this pathway.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0506475102
PMCID: PMC1242316
PMID: 16183742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The p53 tumor suppressor promotes cell cycle arrest or apoptosis in response to diverse stress stimuli. p53-mediated cell death depends in large part on transcriptional up-regulation of target genes. One of these targets, P53-induced protein with a death domain (PIDD), was shown to function as a mediator of p53-dependent apoptosis. Here we show that PIDD is a cytoplasmic protein, and that PIDD-induced apoptosis and growth suppression in embryonic fibroblasts depend on the adaptor protein receptor-interacting protein (RIP)-associated ICH-1/CED-3 homologous protein with a death domain (RAIDD). We provide evidence that PIDD-induced cell death is associated with the early activation of caspase-2 and later activation of caspase-3 and -7. Our results also show that caspase-2 -/- , in contrast to RAIDD -/- , mouse embryonic fibroblasts, are only partially resistant to PIDD. Our findings suggest that caspase-2 contributes to PIDD-mediated cell death, but that it is not the sole effector of this pathway.

Results

Generation of RAIDD -/- Mutant Mice. The targeting strategy to generate RAIDD -deficient mice is described in Supporting Text . Southern and Northern blots were performed to confirm the presence of the rearranged allele and lack of RAIDD RNA expression in mouse tissues (see Fig. 6, which is published as supporting information on the PNAS web site). RAIDD -deficient mice have normal development and lymphocyte populations (data not shown). Absence of RAIDD is also not detrimental to normal lymphocyte proliferation in response to various mitogens, including Con A, anti-CD3, anti-CD3 + anti-CD28, and LPS (data not shown). In addition, we found that RAIDD - / - thymocytes were sensitive to various cytotoxic agents, including dexamethasone, γ-radiation, etoposide, and staurosporine (data not shown).

PIDD Protein Expression. To investigate PIDD protein expression, we generated a polyclonal antibody against a portion of the mouse PIDD protein (residues 141-915). Antibody specificity was validated by the results of Western blotting and immunoprecipitation presented in Fig. 1 . Ectopically expressed Myc-tagged PIDD was detected both with a Myc monoclonal antibody and our PIDD polyclonal antibody ( Fig. 1 A ). In addition, endogenous PIDD, which migrated as a protein species of ≈110 kDa, was detected with the polyclonal antibody. We examined PIDD protein induction in DP16.1/p53ts cells in response to p53 activation at 32°C by immunoprecipitation/Western blot analysis. Endogenous PIDD protein levels increased within 8 h of p53 activation and remained elevated for 16 h ( Fig. 1 B ). This pattern of expression is similar to that of PIDD mRNA in DP16.1/p53ts cells ( 7 ). Immunofluorescent staining of ectopically expressed Myc-PIDD protein using our PIDD antibody or Myc antibody revealed cytoplasmic localization in Saos-2 cells ( Fig. 1 C ).

We next examined endogenous PIDD expression in response to DNA damage in p53-expressing human H460 lung cancer cells and in MEFs. Treatment of H460 cells with adriamycin resulted in PIDD protein accumulation by 16 h ( Fig. 1 D ). γ-Irradiated MEFs showed PIDD accumulation within 4 h of treatment ( Fig. 1 E ). Interestingly, a smaller fragment of ≈55 kDa was observed in both H460 cells and in MEFs after DNA damage and likely represents a specific cleavage fragment similar to one reported previously ( 8 ).

PIDD-Induced Apoptosis Depends on RAIDD. We showed previously that ectopically expressed PIDD promotes apoptosis in K562 cells ( 7 ). PIDD also promotes apoptosis in p53-null DP16.1 murine erythroleukemia cells ( Fig. 2 A ) on the basis of Annexin V staining as well as in Saos-2 cells by nuclear morphology (data not shown). PIDD was shown recently to interact with RAIDD and to promote the activation of caspase-2 ( 8 ). To determine whether the apoptotic function of PIDD depends on its interaction with RAIDD, we compared PIDD-induced apoptosis in RAIDD + / + and RAIDD - / - MEFs. MEFs from RAIDD -deficient and littermate controls were first transformed with the E1A and Ras oncogenes to increase their sensitivity to undergo apoptosis. Transformed MEFs were then retrovirally infected with empty vector (pMIG) or pMIG-PIDD and assessed for apoptosis on the basis of morphological changes, including chromatin condensation and nuclear fragmentation as revealed by staining with Hoechst 33258 ( Fig. 2 B ). The data are summarized in Fig. 2 C and show that RAIDD - / - MEFs are completely resistant to PIDD-induced apoptosis. We confirmed that RAIDD protein was expressed in RAIDD + / + MEFs, that it was absent in RAIDD - / - MEFs ( Fig. 3 A ), and that the level of ectopic PIDD expression was similar in both cell types ( Fig. 3 B ). A similar pattern of PIDD cleavage fragments was also observed in pMIG-PIDD-infected RAIDD + / + and RAIDD - / - MEFS ( Fig. 3 B ). Both RAIDD + / + and RAIDD - / - MEFs were equally sensitive to TNF-α-induced apoptosis ( Fig. 2 C ).

Activation of Caspase-2, -3, and -7 in PIDD-Expressing MEFs. The resistance of RAIDD - / - MEFS to PIDD-induced apoptosis represents the only phenotype we have been able to measure thus far in cells that lack RAIDD and highlights an important role for RAIDD in PIDD-induced apoptosis. We proceeded, therefore, to characterize further the apoptotic response of PIDD-expressing MEFS. Western blots were performed to monitor the processing of procaspase-2, -3, -7, -8, and -9 in RAIDD + / + and RAIDD - / - MEFs at different times after infection with pMIG-PIDD or pMIG ( Fig. 3 B ). Elevated PIDD expression was observed in the pMIG-PIDD-infected cells within 24 h after infection and remained high after 72 h. Strikingly, procaspase-2 processing occurred early after PIDD expression only in RAIDD + / + MEFs and not in RAIDD - / - MEFs and preceded the processing of procapsase-3 and -7 ( Fig. 3 B ). Processing of procaspase-8 and -9 was not detected in PIDD-expressing MEFs of either genotype ( Fig. 3 B ). Hence, PIDD expression leads to the processing of procaspase-2, -3, and -7, and this processing depends on RAIDD. Complementary experiments performed with fluorogenic peptide substrates demonstrated an increase (2.6-fold) in caspase-3/-7 activation (DEVD cleavage) in lysates prepared from PIDD-expressing +/+ MEFs and a lack of caspase-8 (IETD cleavage) and caspase-9 (LEHD cleavage) activity ( Fig. 3 C ). We detected only a slight increase (1.2-fold) in caspase-2 activity (VDVAD cleavage) in the PIDD-expressing +/+ MEFs ( Fig. 3 C ), even though procaspase-2 was completely processed, as reflected by the disappearance of the full length protein on Western blots. As a control, we treated +/+ MEFs with TNF-α and detected activation of caspase-2 (3.3-fold), caspase-3/-7 (8.9-fold), caspase-8 (1.8-fold), and caspase-9 (2.0-fold).

PIDD-Dependent Growth Suppression Depends on RAIDD and Partially on Caspase-2 and -8. To investigate further the involvement of RAIDD in PIDD-induced cell death, we compared the ability of PIDD to inhibit the growth of E1A / Ras -transformed RAIDD + / + and RAIDD - / - MEFs. We used a colony-forming assay, because long-term clonogenic assays provide a more stringent measurement of cell survival than short-term assays. MEFs ( RAIDD + / + and RAIDD - / - ) were coinfected with retroviruses expressing resistance to hygromycin (pBabe-hygro) together with pMIG or pMIG-PIDD. Cells were placed under hygromycin selection 1 day after infection, and we enumerated the drug-resistant colonies ≈1 week later. In multiple independent experiments, PIDD-dependent growth suppression was completely abolished in the absence of RAIDD ( Fig. 4 A ). The requirement of RAIDD for PIDD-dependent apoptosis (Figs. 2 and 3 ) and growth suppression ( Fig. 4 ) indicates that the RAIDD adapter molecule plays an essential role in mediating PIDD-dependent death in MEFs.

Having shown that PIDD expression leads to RAIDD-dependent procaspase-2 processing and activation, we proceeded to evaluate the role of caspase-2 in PIDD-mediated growth suppression using caspase-2 + / + and caspase-2 - / - MEFs. The ability of PIDD to suppress colony formation was attenuated but not abolished in caspase-2 - / - MEFs ( Fig. 4 B ). This suggests that caspase-2 contributes to PIDD-mediated cell death, but that it is not the sole effector of this pathway. Because RAIDD and caspase-2 appear to act upstream of the mitochondria, we sought to determine whether PIDD acted predominantly through the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. Apaf-1 is considered a central element in the mitochondrial pathways of apoptosis, in response to a wide range of apoptotic stimuli ( 17 ). Because Apaf-1 - / - MEFs were shown to be partially resistant to a variety of apoptotic stimuli, we examined the susceptibility of these cells to PIDD-induced growth inhibition in a colony assay. Apaf-1 - / - MEFs were partially resistant to PIDD-dependent colony suppression ( Fig. 4 C ).

The observation that caspase-2 - / - and Apaf-1 - / - MEFs are only partially resistant to PIDD-induced colony suppression, whereas RAIDD - / - MEFs are fully resistant, raised the possibility that other initiator caspases may act downstream of PIDD and RAIDD to promote cell death. We therefore tested the ability of PIDD to inhibit the growth of FADD - / - and caspase-8 -/- MEFs in a colony assay. Both FADD - / - and caspase-8 - / - MEFs were partially resistant to PIDD-dependent colony suppression ( Fig. 4 D and E ). Partial resistance to PIDD-induced growth suppression was also observed in wild-type MEFs and human SkBr3 cells expressing FADD dominant negative (FADD-DN) (data not shown). These data suggest that FADD and caspase-8, two components of the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis, may contribute to the ability of PIDD to suppress the growth of MEFs. The potential involvement of FADD is notable, because PIDD can also interact with FADD ( 6 ) ( Fig. 5 ). We expressed Myc-tagged PIDD in Saos-2 cells and detected binding to endogenous FADD by immunoprecipitation/Western blotting ( Fig. 5 A ). We also detected an interaction between endogenous PIDD and endogenous FADD in H460 cells either left untreated or treated with adriamycin ( Fig. 5 B ). These data demonstrate that PIDD and FADD interact under physiological conditions, and that this interaction is not affected by DNA damage. We estimate that a small proportion of PIDD protein in the H460 cell extract is bound to FADD based on quantitative immunoprecipitation of FADD (data not shown) and the total amount of PIDD protein present in these cells ( Fig. 1 D ).

To evaluate the possibility that PIDD-induced growth suppression of caspase-2 - / - and Apaf-1 - / - MEFs is mediated through a pathway that involves FADD and caspase-8, we generated dominant negative FADD (FADD-DN)-expressing caspase-2 - / - MEFs and tested these cells in a colony assay. Caspase-2 - / - MEFs and caspase-2 - / - MEFs expressing FADD-DN were equally sensitive to PIDD-induced cell death (data not shown). Hence, the combined loss of caspase-2 and FADD (by expression of FADD-DN in caspase-2 - / - cells) provided no additional survival advantage over that seen with the loss of caspase-2 alone.

Discussion

In this study, we have generated RAIDD - / - mice and used embryonic fibroblasts from these mice to investigate the functional significance of the recently reported interaction between RAIDD and PIDD ( 8 ). Several important observations arise from these studies. First, RAIDD - / - mice have normal development and normal lymphocyte populations; TNF-induced killing of embryonic fibroblasts is normal in the absence of RAIDD; and thymocytes from RAIDD - / - mice respond normally to various apoptosis-inducing agents. Hence, these studies failed to identify a critical role for RAIDD either in mouse development or cellular apoptosis. In a second series of experiments designed to test the functional significance of a protein complex containing RAIDD, caspase-2, and PIDD, we found that the apoptotic activity of PIDD in embryonic fibroblasts depended completely on RAIDD and only partly on caspase-2. The resistance of RAIDD - / - MEFs to PIDD-induced apoptosis represents the only phenotype that we have been able to measure thus far in cells that lack RAIDD and highlights an important role for RAIDD in PIDD-induced apoptosis.

PIDD was identified as a p53-up-regulated gene involved in mediating p53-dependent apoptosis ( 7 ). The ability of PIDD to interact with two cytoplasmic adaptor molecules RAIDD and FADD suggests that PIDD may engage the apoptotic machinery at different levels. Despite the overwhelming evidence indicating that p53 promotes apoptosis through the mitochondrial pathway ( 4 , 5 ), compelling evidence supports a relationship between p53 and the death receptor pathway of apoptosis ( 19 ). Interestingly, p53-mediated cell death can be attenuated by overexpression of c-Flip-s, a specific inhibitor of caspase-8, and by pharmacological inhibition of caspase-8, at least in some cell types ( 20 , 21 ). Our findings indicate that enforced PIDD expression promotes cell death through the activation of both the RAIDD/caspase-2 and FADD/caspase-8 pathways. Therefore, PIDD may represent yet another link between the extrinsic and the intrinsic apoptotic pathways.

The absence of phenotype associated with RAIDD and caspase-2 deficiency in mice raises a question regarding the role of PIDD in vivo . The physiological role of PIDD remains unknown; it may be important for apoptosis in some cell types and in response to specific apoptotic signals. Once we have a better understanding of PIDD function in vivo , the importance of RAIDD and caspase-2 as physiological effectors of PIDD-dependent apoptosis can be investigated by using the mouse lines and reagents developed in this study.
