---
pmid: '29727693'
title: Mutations in C11orf70 Cause Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia with Randomization of
  Left/Right Body Asymmetry Due to Defects of Outer and Inner Dynein Arms.
authors:
- Höben IM
- Hjeij R
- Olbrich H
- Dougherty GW
- Nöthe-Menchen T
- Aprea I
- Frank D
- Pennekamp P
- Dworniczak B
- Wallmeier J
- Raidt J
- Nielsen KG
- Philipsen MC
- Santamaria F
- Venditto L
- Amirav I
- Mussaffi H
- Prenzel F
- Wu K
- Bakey Z
- Schmidts M
- Loges NT
- Omran H
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC5986731
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.03.025
---

# Mutations in C11orf70 Cause Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia with Randomization of Left/Right Body Asymmetry Due to Defects of Outer and Inner Dynein Arms.
**Authors:** Höben IM, Hjeij R, Olbrich H, Dougherty GW, Nöthe-Menchen T, Aprea I, Frank D, Pennekamp P, Dworniczak B, Wallmeier J, Raidt J, Nielsen KG, Philipsen MC, Santamaria F, Venditto L, Amirav I, Mussaffi H, Prenzel F, Wu K, Bakey Z, Schmidts M, Loges NT, Omran H
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.03.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.03.025)
**PMC:** [PMC5986731](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5986731/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2018 May 3;102(5):973-984. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.03.025.

Mutations in C11orf70 Cause Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia with Randomization of 
Left/Right Body Asymmetry Due to Defects of Outer and Inner Dynein Arms.

Höben IM(1), Hjeij R(1), Olbrich H(1), Dougherty GW(1), Nöthe-Menchen T(1), 
Aprea I(1), Frank D(1), Pennekamp P(1), Dworniczak B(1), Wallmeier J(1), Raidt 
J(1), Nielsen KG(2), Philipsen MC(2), Santamaria F(3), Venditto L(3), Amirav 
I(4), Mussaffi H(5), Prenzel F(6), Wu K(7), Bakey Z(7), Schmidts M(8), Loges 
NT(1), Omran H(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital Muenster, 
48149 Muenster, Germany.
(2)Danish PCD Centre, Pediatrics Pulmonary Service, Department of Pediatrics and 
Adolescent Medicine, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, 2100 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, Federico II University, 80131 
Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Alberta, T6G 1C9 Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada.
(5)Schneider Children's Medical Center, 4920235 Petach-Tikva, Israel; Sackler 
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, 69978 Tel Aviv, Israel.
(6)Clinic for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Leipzig, 
04103 Leipzig, Germany.
(7)Genome Research Division, Human Genetics Department, Radboud University 
Medical Center and Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Geert 
Grooteplein Zuid 10, 6525KL Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(8)Genome Research Division, Human Genetics Department, Radboud University 
Medical Center and Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Geert 
Grooteplein Zuid 10, 6525KL Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Pediatric Genetics 
Division, Center for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Freiburg University, Mathildenstrasse 1, 79112 Freiburg, Germany.
(9)Department of General Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital Muenster, 
48149 Muenster, Germany. Electronic address: heymut.omran@ukmuenster.de.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is characterized by chronic airway disease, 
male infertility, and randomization of the left/right body axis as a result of 
defects of motile cilia and sperm flagella. We identified loss-of-function 
mutations in the open-reading frame C11orf70 in PCD individuals from five 
distinct families. Transmission electron microscopy analyses and high-resolution 
immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrate that loss-of-function mutations in 
C11orf70 cause immotility of respiratory cilia and sperm flagella, respectively, 
as a result of the loss of axonemal outer (ODAs) and inner dynein arms (IDAs), 
indicating that C11orf70 is involved in cytoplasmic assembly of dynein arms. 
Expression analyses of C11orf70 showed that C11orf70 is expressed in ciliated 
respiratory cells and that the expression of C11orf70 is upregulated during 
ciliogenesis, similar to other previously described cytoplasmic dynein-arm 
assembly factors. Furthermore, C11orf70 shows an interaction with cytoplasmic 
ODA/IDA assembly factor DNAAF2, supporting our hypothesis that C11orf70 is a 
preassembly factor involved in the pathogenesis of PCD. The identification of 
additional genetic defects that cause PCD and male infertility is of great 
importance for the clinic as well as for genetic counselling.

Copyright © 2018 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.03.025
PMCID: PMC5986731
PMID: 29727693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is characterized by chronic airway disease, male infertility, and randomization of the left/right body axis as a result of defects of motile cilia and sperm flagella. We identified loss-of-function mutations in the open-reading frame C11orf70 in PCD individuals from five distinct families. Transmission electron microscopy analyses and high-resolution immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrate that loss-of-function mutations in C11orf70 cause immotility of respiratory cilia and sperm flagella, respectively, as a result of the loss of axonemal outer (ODAs) and inner dynein arms (IDAs), indicating that C11orf70 is involved in cytoplasmic assembly of dynein arms. Expression analyses of C11orf70 showed that C11orf70 is expressed in ciliated respiratory cells and that the expression of C11orf70 is upregulated during ciliogenesis, similar to other previously described cytoplasmic dynein-arm assembly factors. Furthermore, C11orf70 shows an interaction with cytoplasmic ODA/IDA assembly factor DNAAF2, supporting our hypothesis that C11orf70 is a preassembly factor involved in the pathogenesis of PCD. The identification of additional genetic defects that cause PCD and male infertility is of great importance for the clinic as well as for genetic counselling.
