---
pmid: '17581959'
title: Specific Drosophila Dscam juxtamembrane variants control dendritic elaboration
  and axonal arborization.
authors:
- Shi L
- Yu HH
- Yang JS
- Lee T
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6672701
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1517-07.2007
---

# Specific Drosophila Dscam juxtamembrane variants control dendritic elaboration and axonal arborization.
**Authors:** Shi L, Yu HH, Yang JS, Lee T
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1517-07.2007](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1517-07.2007)
**PMC:** [PMC6672701](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6672701/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2007 Jun 20;27(25):6723-8. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1517-07.2007.

Specific Drosophila Dscam juxtamembrane variants control dendritic elaboration 
and axonal arborization.

Shi L(1), Yu HH, Yang JS, Lee T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Drosophila Dscam isoforms are derived from two alternative 
transmembrane/juxtamembrane domains (TMs) in addition to thousands of ectodomain 
variants. Using a microRNA-based RNA interference technology, we selectively 
knocked down different subsets of Dscams containing either the exon 17.1- or 
exon 17.2-encoding TM. Eliminating Dscam[TM1] reduced Dscam expression but 
minimally affected postembryonic axonal morphogenesis. In contrast, depleting 
Dscam[TM2] blocked axon arborization. Further removal of Dscam[TM1] enhanced the 
loss-of-Dscam[TM2] axonal phenotypes. However, Dscam[TM1] primarily regulates 
dendritic development, as evidenced by the observations that removing Dscam[TM1] 
alone impeded elaboration of dendrites and that transgenic Dscam[TM1], but not 
Dscam[TM2], effectively rescued Dscam mutant dendritic phenotypes in mosaic 
organisms. These distinct Dscam functions can be attributed to the juxtamembrane 
regions of TMs that govern dendritic versus axonal targeting of Dscam as well. 
Together, we suggest that specific Drosophila Dscam juxtamembrane variants 
control dendritic elaboration and axonal arborization.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1517-07.2007
PMCID: PMC6672701
PMID: 17581959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Drosophila Dscam isoforms are derived from two alternative transmembrane/juxtamembrane domains (TMs) in addition to thousands of ectodomain variants. Using a microRNA-based RNA interference technology, we selectively knocked down different subsets of Dscams containing either the exon 17.1- or exon 17.2-encoding TM. Eliminating Dscam[TM1] reduced Dscam expression but minimally affected postembryonic axonal morphogenesis. In contrast, depleting Dscam[TM2] blocked axon arborization. Further removal of Dscam[TM1] enhanced the loss-of-Dscam[TM2] axonal phenotypes. However, Dscam[TM1] primarily regulates dendritic development, as evidenced by the observations that removing Dscam[TM1] alone impeded elaboration of dendrites and that transgenic Dscam[TM1], but not Dscam[TM2], effectively rescued Dscam mutant dendritic phenotypes in mosaic organisms. These distinct Dscam functions can be attributed to the juxtamembrane regions of TMs that govern dendritic versus axonal targeting of Dscam as well. Together, we suggest that specific Drosophila Dscam juxtamembrane variants control dendritic elaboration and axonal arborization.

Introduction

The insect Dscam gene encodes thousands of distinct immunoglobulin/fibronectin-type cell adhesion molecules that mainly differ in their extracellular domain and can carry one of the two well-conserved transmembrane/juxtamembrane segments (TMs) ( Schmucker et al., 2000 ). The variations in the ectodomain have drastic impacts on the inter-Dscam binding in vitro ( Wojtowicz et al., 2004 ), whereas distinct TMs may target Dscam to different subcellular compartments ( Wang et al., 2004 ; Zhan et al., 2004 ). Such a huge repertoire of diverse homophilic cell adhesion molecules may help govern how a complex nervous system is specifically wired.

In Drosophila , Dscam is widely required for proper neuronal morphogenesis, especially the bifurcation/arborization of neurites. Interestingly, loss of Dscam function affects neurite trajectories selectively at the loci where bifurcation normally occurs ( Wang et al., 2002 ; Chen et al., 2006 ). Some Dscam mutant neurites stall with clumps of possibly numerous short branches at the ends, resulting in truncation of axonal trees at their first points of bifurcation. These characteristic phenotypes are probably derived from excessive repetitive bifurcations of mutant growth cones, because others that have fully extended frequently exhibit evidence for additional bifurcations at the normal branching points. In addition, proper guidance of individual growth cones at the points of ramification, especially with respect to their sister growth cones, requires Dscam. It appears that Dscam controls neurite arborization by preventing comigration of sister growth cones, thus preventing the number of sister growth cones from exceeding the number of available fascicles. Dynamic stochastic expression of distinct Dscam ectodomains ( Neves et al., 2004 ) would permit self recognition in such “like-kill-like” morphogenetic processes. Consistent with this model, most Dscam ectodomain exon alternatives are not conserved through evolution, arguing that the overall diversity is more critical than the identities of individual variants ( Graveley et al., 2004 ).

In contrast, the two exon alternatives that encode the TM of Dscam are well conserved ( Graveley et al., 2004 ). Interestingly, ectopic Dscam can be preferentially localized to dendrites by selective utilization of exon 17.1 (encoding TM1) or localized to axons by using exon 17.2 (encoding TM2) ( Wang et al., 2004 ). To determine the roles of Dscam[TM1] versus Dscam[TM2], we previously created Dscam s lacking either exon 17.1 or exon 17.2. Deletion of either exon 17 led to skipping of the other exon 17 in many Dscam transcripts (our unpublished results). Manipulating genomic Dscam can be problematic for other reasons (see Discussion). We, thus, resorted to a microRNA(miRNA)-based RNA interference (RNAi) technology ( Chen et al., 2007 ) for specifically silencing exon 17.1- or exon 17.2-containing Dscam transcripts. We found that endogenous Dscam[TM1] and Dscam[TM2] primarily act to mediate dendritic elaboration and axonal arborization, respectively. Consistent results were obtained with transgenic Dscam alleviating dendrite versus axon phenotypes in Dscam mutant clones depending on the nature of its TM. In addition, the cytoplasmic juxtamembrane regions of the TMs are sufficient to control Dscam localization as well as its differential roles in dendrites versus axons. Together, we suggest that Dscams with distinct TMs control dendritic elaboration versus axonal arborization.

Discussion

Our use of an miRNA-based RNAi technology permits depletion of distinct subsets of Dscam isoforms based on their exon compositions. Reducing TM1-containing (encoded by exon 17.1) versus TM2-containing (encoded by exon 17.2) Dscams during morphogenesis of various model neurons allowed us to demonstrate that Dscam[TM1] and Dscam[TM2] are preferentially involved in dendritic elaboration and axonal arborization, respectively. This differential involvement of distinct Dscams is likely a result of differential protein targeting, because they are specified by similar cytoplasmic juxtamembrane portions of the Dscam exon 17-encoding TMs. However, after strong binary induction, transgenic Dscam[TM2] can exist abundantly in both dendrites and axons, whereas Dscam[TM1] remains primarily restricted to dendrites, although Dscam[TM1] exhibits more broad function than Dscam[TM2]. Knocking down both further impeded MB axons ( Fig. 2 I ), whereas eliminating exon 17.1-containing Dscam was equally potent as silencing all Dscam transcripts in the inhibition of PN dendrites ( Fig. 3 ). These discrepancies suggest targeting-independent functional distinction between Dscam[TM1] and Dscam[TM2].

Despite some recently raised concerns on the specificity of RNAi-mediated gene silencing ( Ma et al., 2006 ), we are confident in this study for several reasons. First, it should be more straightforward to obviate potential off-target effects with the microRNA-based RNAi constructs, because each of them only yields two 22-nucleotide-long double-stranded RNAs. Second, we generated an independent miRNA-based RNAi construct against a common Dscam exon in addition to the ones targeting exon 17.1 versus exon 17.2 and have obtained the expected results after analogous induction of RNAi against these discrete Dscam sequences. Third, the specificity and effectiveness of our RNAi was also confirmed by direct visualization of specific Dscam proteins in vivo . Fourth, all of our RNAi-induced phenotypes were comparable both qualitatively and quantitatively to previously known Dscam loss-of-function phenotypes. Fifth, we could also rescue the RNAi-mediated silencing of Dscam using appropriate Dscam transgenes. In addition, our demonstration that endogenous Dscam mediates dendritic versus axonal morphogenesis depending on the presence of TM1 or TM2 has been implicated by multiple independent lines of research. In particular, whereas transgenic Dscam with TM2 consistently rescues of Dscam mutant axons, Dscam[TM1] is much more potent than Dscam[TM2] in the rescue of Dscam mutant dendrite elaboration.

Alternative methods for knocking out subsets of isoforms mainly involve deletion of specific exon alternatives at the genomic level. In theory, by gene targeting ( Gong and Golic, 2003 ), one can modify a genomic Dscam to carry only exon 17.1 or exon 17.2 in Drosophila . But such genomic manipulation is potentially problematic. Assuming simple gene targeting does not alter the levels of Dscam expression, elimination of subsets of isoforms could inevitably lead to expression of other isoforms in much broader patterns and/or at higher levels than the normal unperturbed conditions. This may attenuate the defects resulting from the loss of specific isoforms and/or elicit additional phenotypes because of ectopic expression of the residual isoforms, further complicating interpretation. In contrast, knocking down various subsets of Dscam isoforms at the level of translation (e.g., by microRNA) should deplete the isoforms of interest without affecting the expression of others. This way, one can potentially map the endogenous patterns of expression for various specific subsets of Dscam isoforms and, more importantly, unequivocally determine the contributions made by given subsets of Dscam isoforms to various neural developments. In the case of Dscam[TM1] versus Dscam[TM2], we found that, although the relative abundance might differ at various developmental stages, they are apparently coexpressed in most cells. The coexpression with differential requirements implies that they are functionally distinct. Dscam[TM1] selectively concentrates in dendritic growth cones, whereas Dscam[TM2] is preferentially located to axonal growth cones. Nevertheless, we could not observe their differential targeting after depletion of one versus the other, because most neuropils are made up of both dendrites and axons. We also recently learned that retrograde transport plays an essential role in the dendritic enrichment of Dscam[TM1] (our unpublished results), potentially explaining why both Dscam[TM1] and Dscam[TM2] could be detected in the cores of larval MB peduncles where newly derived MB axons are selectively fasciculated (our unpublished observation). Finally, compared with the constitutive changes associated with gene targeting, GAL4/UAS-mediated targeted induction of RNAi permits more varied control over when and/or where to knock down the isoforms of interest and should better illustrate the stage- as well as tissue-specific isoform-characteristic functions.

Together, our results indicate Dscams with distinct TMs are differentially involved in morphogenesis of dendrites versus axons, most likely because of differential protein targeting. What might be the advantages for having two exon alternatives to specify where a Dscam protein should be located? One possible advantage is the ability to independently control the Dscam repertoire at dendrite and axon within a single neuron. For instance, coupling different ectodomains with TM1 would permit selective enrichment of Dscams with distinct homophilic binding specificities in the dendrites but not axons. Additionally, for a given ectodomain, varying the ratio of TM1/TM2 could simultaneously alter the amounts of dendritic and axonal Dscams. Given that dendrites and axons of the same neurons often acquire different morphological characteristic features, it would be interesting to determine whether the TM1/TM2-governed differential distribution of Dscam directly underlies some aspects of the differential morphogenesis of dendrites versus axons.
