---
pmid: '18635608'
title: Tissue-specific requirements of beta-catenin in external genitalia development.
authors:
- Lin C
- Yin Y
- Long F
- Ma L
journal: Development
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC2614308
doi: 10.1242/dev.020586
---

# Tissue-specific requirements of beta-catenin in external genitalia development.
**Authors:** Lin C, Yin Y, Long F, Ma L
**Journal:** Development (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.020586](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.020586)
**PMC:** [PMC2614308](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2614308/)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2008 Aug;135(16):2815-25. doi: 10.1242/dev.020586. Epub 2008 Jul 
17.

Tissue-specific requirements of beta-catenin in external genitalia development.

Lin C(1), Yin Y, Long F, Ma L.

Author information:
(1)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, Washington University School 
of Medicine, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

External genitalia are body appendages specialized for internal fertilization. 
Their development can be divided into two phases, an early androgen-independent 
phase and a late androgen-dependent sexual differentiation phase. In the early 
phase, the embryonic anlage of external genitalia, the genital tubercle (GT), is 
morphologically identical in both sexes. Although congenital external genitalia 
malformations represent the second most common birth defect in humans, the 
genetic pathways governing early external genitalia development and urethra 
formation are poorly understood. Proper development of the GT requires 
coordinated outgrowth of the mesodermally derived mesenchyme and extension of 
the endodermal urethra within an ectodermal epithelial capsule. Here, we 
demonstrate that beta-catenin plays indispensable and distinct roles in each of 
the aforementioned three tissue layers in early androgen-independent GT 
development. WNT-beta-catenin signaling is required in the endodermal urethra to 
activate and maintain Fgf8 expression and direct GT outgrowth, as well as to 
maintain homeostasis of the urethra. Moreover, beta-catenin is required in the 
mesenchyme to promote cell proliferation. By contrast, beta-catenin is required 
in the ectoderm to maintain tissue integrity, possibly through cell-cell 
adhesion during GT outgrowth. The fact that both endodermal and ectodermal 
beta-catenin knockout animals develop severe hypospadias in both sexes raises 
the possibility that the deregulation of any of these functions can contribute 
to the etiology of congenital external genital defects in humans.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.020586
PMCID: PMC2614308
PMID: 18635608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

External genitalia development starts at around 4 weeks of gestation in humans ( Spaulding, 1921 ; Yamada et al., 2003 ) and on embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5) in mice ( Perriton et al., 2002 ; Suzuki et al., 2002 ), respectively, when a paired genital swellings form on either side of the cloaca. The swellings subsequently merge medially to form the genital tubercle (GT) and continue to grow distally. Within the GT, cloacal endoderm extends distally to form the future urethra ( Felix, 1912 ; Kurzrock et al., 1999a ; Perriton et al., 2002 ). Early GT development involves coordinated growth and patterning of cells from the ectodermally-derived surface epithelium, the mesodermally-derived mesenchyme and the endodermally-derived urethral epithelium (UE) ( Kurzrock et al., 1999a ; Perriton et al., 2002 ). Up to E15.5, male and female GTs are morphologically indistinguishable ( Suzuki et al., 2002 ) and their development is presumably controlled by the same genetic program. On and after E16.5, the urethrae in males canalize in the presence of androgen signaling, while they remain as an epithelia cord in females ( Baskin et al., 2001 ; Suzuki et al., 2002 ; Yamada et al., 2003 ). Here, we focused on studying the genetic program regulating early androgen-independent GT patterning.

Both the GT and limb bud share similar morphogenetic and signaling pathways, perhaps reflecting a similar evolutionary origin (teleosts fins). Shh ( Haraguchi et al., 2001 ; Perriton et al., 2002 ), Wnt5a ( Suzuki et al., 2003 ; Yamaguchi et al., 1999 )., Bmp4/Bmpr1a/Noggin ( Dunn et al., 1997 ; Suzuki et al., 2003 ), and Hox genes ( HoxD13 and HoxA13 ) ( Dolle et al., 1993 ; Fromental-Ramain et al., 1996 ; Morgan et al., 2003 ; Warot et al., 1997 ; Zakany et al., 1997 ) are all essential for the development of both appendages. In addition, both processes require an epithelial signaling center marked by Fgf8 expression, namely the apical ectodermal ridge (AER) in the limb ( Cohn et al., 1995 ; Crossley et al., 1996 ; Lewandoski et al., 2000 ; Mariani and Martin, 2003 ; Niswander et al., 1993 ; Saunders, 1948 ; Summerbell, 1974 ) and the distal urethral epithelium (dUE) in the GT ( Cohn, 2004 ; Haraguchi et al., 2000 ; Suzuki et al., 2003 ; Yamada et al., 2006 ). Several lines of evidence support the notion that FGF8 is the GT outgrowth promoting factor. First, surgical removal of Fgf8 expressing dUE resulted in defective GT outgrowth. Second, neutralizing FGF8 with antibody also caused similar outgrowth defects. Finally, outgrowth in dUE-deficient GTs can be restored by application of FGF8 protein beads ( Haraguchi et al., 2000 ). However, in contrast to the AER, little is known about how the dUE is established and maintained within the endodermal cloaca and how it functions to promote GT outgrowth. The development of the GT differs from that of the limb bud in that GT growth and patterning has to be coordinated with endodermal urethral development which requires Fgf10/Fgfr2 signaling ( Petiot et al., 2005 ) and HoxA13 ( Morgan et al., 2003 ; Scott et al., 2005 ). Last but not least, the GT forms with left-right symmetry while the limb develops asymmetrically. Although both Wnt5a−/− and Tcf1 / Tcf4 double knockout embryos showed GT agenesis ( Gregorieff et al., 2004 ; Suzuki et al., 2003 ; Yamaguchi et al., 1999 ), both mutants exhibited severe caudal truncations, raising the concern that the genital phenotype in these mutants might be secondary. Therefore the involvement of WNT signaling in GT development is not clear. In this study, using tissue-specific inactivation of β-Catenin, a key signal transducer of the canonical WNT pathway, we show that β-Catenin-mediated WNT signaling is required at multiple stages for directing GT outgrowth and urethra formation. β-Catenin function is also required in the ventral ectoderm to maintain epithelial integrity.

DISCUSSION

Most studies on genitalia development focused on the role of androgen signaling, while much less is known about the genetic program governing early androgen-independent GT development. With the advent of Cre/LoxP technology, we have now investigated the function of β-Catenin in GT development in a tissue-specific manner and demonstrated distinct functions for β-Catenin in each tissue layer.

Our data showed that the timing of β-Catenin removal from the endodermal urethra correlated with the severity of GT outgrowth defects. Deletion around GT initiation completely abrogated Fgf8 induction in the dUE and subsequent GT outgrowth, whereas later removal resulted in reduced Fgf8 expression and under-developed GT. The graded GT phenotypes are similar to earlier findings in the limb in which AER removal at successive time points caused limb truncations at increasingly distal positions ( Saunders, 1948 ) supporting a conserved function of dUE and AER in directing appendages outgrowth ( Cohn, 2004 ; Minelli, 2002 ; Yamada et al., 2006 ). Although it has long been recognized that the distal signaling centers are essential for appendage outgrowth, less is known about how they are initially established and restricted to a specific region within a seemingly homogeneous epithelium. Our data demonstrated that activation of WNT-β-Catenin signaling is necessary and sufficient to activate Fgf8 expression both in early cloacal endoderm and in later UE during GT development. Similarly, when we activated WNT-β-Catenin signaling in the inter-limb ectoderm and non-AER limb ectoderm, Fgf8 was ectopically expressed and as a result, ectopic outgrowth was observed. These data demonstrated that within a developmental window, the ectoderm and cloacal endoderm are competent to respond to activated WNT-β-Catenin signaling and induce Fgf8 expression. The fact that ectopic WNT-β-Catenin signaling is sufficient to initiate Fgf8 expression and outgrowth, suggests that restricting WNT-β-Catenin activity to a precise location represents a critical step in determining the position and physical dimensions of AER and dUE. Unfortunately, what mechanism restricts WNT-β-Catenin activity to the signaling center remains largely unknown.

Epithelia-mesenchymal interactions play critical roles during organogenesis ( Hogan, 1999 ), including external genitalia development ( Kurzrock et al., 1999b ; Murakami and Mizuno, 1986 ). Once established, the dUE regulates mesenchymal gene expression and directs outgrowth. In this study, we identified a set of regulatory genes including Msx2 , Lef1 , Bmp4 and Wnt5a whose expression depends on dUE signaling. These data provide in vivo evidence for the function of dUE in orchestrating and maintaining mesenchymal gene expression.

Our data also demonstrated a requirement for WNT-β-Catenin signaling in the growth and patterning of endodermal urethra as LOF mutant GTs showed open urethra accompanied by reduced cellular proliferation. We specifically focused on analyzing the expression of two known important regulators of cell proliferation and apoptosis, Shh and Bmp4 ( Haraguchi et al., 2001 ; Perriton et al., 2002 ; Suzuki et al., 2003 ). The genetic hierarchy for Wnt , Shh and Bmp4 has not been established in GT development. Our data suggest that Bmp4 acts genetically downstream of WNT-β-Catenin in dUE in a cell autonomous manner and in GT mesenchyme in a non-cell autonomous manner, possibly mediated by Fgf8 as application of FGF 8 -soaked beads can stimulate Bmp4 expression in GT mesenchyme ( Haraguchi et al., 2000 ). On the other hand, Shh can repress Bmp4 expression in dUE evidenced by the ectopic Bmp4 induction in Shh−/− GT ( Haraguchi et al., 2001 ). In our mutants, Shh downregulation also correlates with ectopic Bmp4 activation in dUE but only in the presence of WNT-β-Catenin and FGF8 signaling. Since Fgf8 induction occurs in Shh−/− GT and that Shh expression is downregulated in β- Catenin LOF dUE, these data suggest that β- Catenin is at the top of a genetic hierarchy regulating Fgf8 , Shh and Bmp4 expression ( Fig. 8 ). On the other hand, we obtained an unexpected result in which Shh exhibited a bimodal response to activated WNT-β-Catenin signaling in GOF mutants ( Fig. 5B’’ ). One possibility is that ectopic Bmp4 expression in the distal urethral cells is responsible for Shh repression in this region. In support of this notion, Bmp4 and Shh have been shown to repress each other’s transcription in other developmental systems ( Monsoro-Burq and Le Douarin, 2001 ; Zhang et al., 2000 ). Alternatively, ectopic Bmp4 expression may be secondary to Shh downregulation and in this case, it is not clear what mediates the bimodal response of Shh . Taken together, we propose a GT signaling pathway (summarized in Fig. 8 ) in which WNT-β-Catenin signaling regulates both Fgf8 and Shh expression and Shh in turn inhibits Bmp4 . Thus it appears that the balance between positive regulators of cell proliferation, Fgf8 and Shh , and the negative regulator Bmp4 controls cellular proliferation in the urethra to maintain homeostasis. In addition to Fgf8 and Shh , Fgfr2 is also required for urethral cell proliferation ( Petiot et al., 2005 ). Fgfr2 expression was visually reduced in both β- Catenin LOF and GOF urethrae ( Supplemental Fig. 3E’ and 3E’’ , respectively) evidenced by in situ analysis, although real-time PCR only confirmed such a reduction in LOF UE. The urethra phenotype in β- Catenin LOF mutant was similar to that observed in Fgfr2IIIb−/− mutants ( Petiot et al., 2005 ). However, unlike in Fgfr2IIIb −/− embryos, the expression of K14, a progenitor cell marker for squamous epithelium, was maintained. Thus, the defects observed in our LOF GT were unlikely caused by reduced Fgfr2 signaling. The interaction between WNT-β-Catenin and Fgfr2 signaling pathways needs further investigation. Canonical WNT activity was not detected in the ventral ectoderm. Consistently, WNT signaling in the ectodermal β- Catenin LOF GT does not seem to be affected evidenced by the presence of TOPGAL positive cells and normal Fgf8 and Tcf1 expression. Nonetheless, removal of ectodermal β- Catenin still resulted in severe GT malformations. Tissue lineage analysis revealed an ectodermal breakdown at the ventral midline and subsequent urethral exposure which implied that the ability of β- Catenin −/− ectoderm to contain the growing GT was compromised. Consistently K14, an intermediate filament protein that gives tensile strength to epithelium, is not expressed in the mutant ectoderm and the fact that mutant ectoderm shows signs of stretching suggest lack of tensile support could directly contribute to the phenotype. In β- Catenin -deficient ectoderm, we observed abnormal epithelial morphology and disrupted ecto-endodermal connection during initial GT outgrowth. Therefore although we could not formally exclude disrupted WNT signaling as a cause of the mutant phenotype, it is more likely that weakened cell-cell adhesion was responsible for the ectodermal rupture. During early androgen-independent GT development, the endodermal urethra remains attached to the ventral surface epithelium ( Perriton et al., 2002 ). As the GT protrudes from the ventral body wall, the ectoderm contacting the urethra would receive increased physical force. A well-formed ectodermal-endodermal connection in this region may be required for structural support and coordinate the growth of the two epithelia. This function for β-Catenin in cell adhesion has also been implicated in other developmental systems ( Cattelino et al., 2003 ; Fu et al., 2006 ). Why couldn’t over-expression of Plakoglobin in the mutant GT ectoderm compensate for the function of β-Catenin in cell adhesion? We propose that although Plakoglobin can connect E-Cadherin to α-Catenin and maintain the basic structure of adherens junction, such a junction might not provide the same adhesive force as the wild-type congeners. In Plakoglobin knockout mice, it is known that β-Catenin can only partially compensate its function in desmosomes ( Bierkamp et al., 1999 ). These results suggest that both Plakoglobin and β-Catenin have unique functions in cell adhesion that cannot be fully compensated.

In humans, hypospadias is defined as an abnormal urethral opening anywhere along the ventral side of the penis and scrotum. Both genetic and endocrine factors are implicated in the etiology of hypospadias. Androgen signaling is particularly important because hypospadias is commonly considered a male disease, although cleft clitoris does occur ( Baskin and Ebbers, 2006 ). Both our endodermal and ectodermal β- Catenin conditional knockout mice exhibited a severe hypospadias phenotype in both sexes. These results raise the possibility that disruption of WNT-β-Catenin signaling and/or proper cell adhesion by either somatic mutation or endocrine disruption during GT development may lead to external genital abnormalities including hypospadias in humans. Future research on genetic mechanisms and endocrine-genetic interaction could shed light on external genitalia development as well as pathogenesis of hypospadias and other congenital malformations.
