---
pmid: '28724761'
title: ISG15 Modulates Type I Interferon Signaling and the Antiviral Response during
  Hepatitis E Virus Replication.
authors:
- Sooryanarain H
- Rogers AJ
- Cao D
- Haac MER
- Karpe YA
- Meng XJ
journal: J Virol
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC5599768
doi: 10.1128/JVI.00621-17
---

# ISG15 Modulates Type I Interferon Signaling and the Antiviral Response during Hepatitis E Virus Replication.
**Authors:** Sooryanarain H, Rogers AJ, Cao D, Haac MER, Karpe YA, Meng XJ
**Journal:** J Virol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.00621-17](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00621-17)
**PMC:** [PMC5599768](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5599768/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2017 Sep 12;91(19):e00621-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00621-17. Print 2017
Oct  1.

ISG15 Modulates Type I Interferon Signaling and the Antiviral Response during 
Hepatitis E Virus Replication.

Sooryanarain H(1), Rogers AJ(1), Cao D(1), Haac MER(1), Karpe YA(1), Meng XJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Pathobiology, Virginia-Maryland College 
of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 
Blacksburg, Virginia, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Pathobiology, Virginia-Maryland College 
of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 
Blacksburg, Virginia, USA xjmeng@vt.edu.

Hepatitis E virus (HEV), a single-stranded positive-sense RNA virus, generally 
causes self-limiting acute viral hepatitis, although chronic HEV infection has 
recently become a significant clinical problem in immunocompromised individuals, 
especially in solid-organ transplant recipients. Innate immunity, via the type I 
interferon (IFN) response, plays an important role during the initial stages of 
a viral infection. IFN-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15), an IFN-induced ubiquitin-like 
protein, is known to have an immunomodulatory role and can have a direct 
antiviral effect on a wide spectrum of virus families. In the present study, we 
investigated the antiviral effect as well as the potential immunomodulatory role 
of ISG15 during HEV replication. The results revealed that HEV induced high 
levels of ISG15 production both in vitro (Huh7-S10-3 liver cells) and in vivo 
(liver tissues from HEV-infected pigs); however, ISG15 is not required for virus 
replication. We also demonstrated that ISG15 silencing potentiates enhanced type 
I IFN-mediated signaling, resulting in an increase in the type I IFN-mediated 
antiviral effect during HEV replication. This observed enhanced type I IFN 
signaling correlated with an increase in IFN-stimulated gene expression levels 
during HEV replication. Furthermore, we showed that PKR and OAS1 played 
important roles in the ISG15-mediated type I IFN sensitivity of HEV. Taken 
together, the results from this study suggest that ISG15 plays an important 
immunomodulatory role and regulates HEV sensitivity to exogenous type I 
IFN.IMPORTANCE Hepatitis E virus (HEV) infection typically causes self-limiting 
acute viral hepatitis. However, chronic HEV infection has recently become a 
significant clinical problem in immunocompromised patients. Pegylated interferon 
(IFN) has been used to treat chronic HEV infection in solid-organ transplant 
patients with some success. However, the mechanism behind the type I 
IFN-mediated antiviral effect against HEV remains unclear. This report 
demonstrates that ISG15 induced by HEV replication in Huh7-S10-3 human liver 
cells plays an immunomodulatory role by negatively regulating type I IFN 
signaling and, thus, HEV sensitivity to type I IFN. Our results also show that 
PKR and OAS1 play important roles in the ISG15-mediated type I IFN sensitivity 
of HEV.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00621-17
PMCID: PMC5599768
PMID: 28724761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

ABSTRACT

Hepatitis E virus (HEV), a single-stranded positive-sense RNA virus, generally causes self-limiting acute viral hepatitis, although chronic HEV infection has recently become a significant clinical problem in immunocompromised individuals, especially in solid-organ transplant recipients. Innate immunity, via the type I interferon (IFN) response, plays an important role during the initial stages of a viral infection. IFN-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15), an IFN-induced ubiquitin-like protein, is known to have an immunomodulatory role and can have a direct antiviral effect on a wide spectrum of virus families. In the present study, we investigated the antiviral effect as well as the potential immunomodulatory role of ISG15 during HEV replication. The results revealed that HEV induced high levels of ISG15 production both in vitro (Huh7-S10-3 liver cells) and in vivo (liver tissues from HEV-infected pigs); however, ISG15 is not required for virus replication. We also demonstrated that ISG15 silencing potentiates enhanced type I IFN-mediated signaling, resulting in an increase in the type I IFN-mediated antiviral effect during HEV replication. This observed enhanced type I IFN signaling correlated with an increase in IFN-stimulated gene expression levels during HEV replication. Furthermore, we showed that PKR and OAS1 played important roles in the ISG15-mediated type I IFN sensitivity of HEV. Taken together, the results from this study suggest that ISG15 plays an important immunomodulatory role and regulates HEV sensitivity to exogenous type I IFN.

IMPORTANCE Hepatitis E virus (HEV) infection typically causes self-limiting acute viral hepatitis. However, chronic HEV infection has recently become a significant clinical problem in immunocompromised patients. Pegylated interferon (IFN) has been used to treat chronic HEV infection in solid-organ transplant patients with some success. However, the mechanism behind the type I IFN-mediated antiviral effect against HEV remains unclear. This report demonstrates that ISG15 induced by HEV replication in Huh7-S10-3 human liver cells plays an immunomodulatory role by negatively regulating type I IFN signaling and, thus, HEV sensitivity to type I IFN. Our results also show that PKR and OAS1 play important roles in the ISG15-mediated type I IFN sensitivity of HEV.

INTRODUCTION

Hepatitis E virus (HEV) is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA virus approximately 7.2 kb in size belonging to the family Hepeviridae , which consists of two genera ( Orthohepevirus and Piscihepevirus ) and 5 species ( 1 ). Within the orthohepevirus A species, there exist at least 7 genotypes: genotypes 1 and 2 are restricted to humans, genotypes 3 and 4 infect humans and several other animal species, genotypes 5 and 6 infect wild boars, and genotype 7 infects camel ( 1 – 3 ). It is recognized that the genotype 3 and 4 HEV strains are zoonotic; pigs and other species serve as the reservoirs ( 3 – 5 ).

The genome of HEV encodes three proteins. ORF1 is a nonstructural protein involved in virus replication, ORF2 is the capsid protein involved in virus assembly and receptor binding, and ORF3 is involved in virus egress. HEV virions were initially identified as nonenveloped viral particles; however, quasi-enveloped HEV virions have recently been reported ( 6 ). HEV replication occurs in cytoplasm ( 7 ) and uses a clathrin-dependent pathway ( 8 ) as well as an endosomal pathway ( 9 , 10 ) for cellular entry. Endosomal acidification has been shown to be important for HEV infectivity ( 9 ). A recent study has also shown that multivesicular bodies and the exosomal pathway play an important role in virus egress ( 11 ). Therefore, it is postulated that cloaking the viral capsid protein within the host-derived membrane enables HEV to avoid triggering the host immune response ( 10 ).

The disease caused by HEV, hepatitis E, is of global public health importance. It is estimated that there are approximately 20 million HEV infections each year, resulting in 3.3 million symptomatic cases and more than 56,000 hepatitis E-related deaths annually ( 12 ). HEV is mainly transmitted via the fecal-oral route through contaminated water or food. Hepatitis E is usually a self-limiting acute disease; however, chronic HEV infection has recently become a major clinical problem in immunocompromised patients, especially in organ transplant recipients ( 13 ) and in patients with HIV infection, leukemia, or lymphoma ( 14 ). The chronic HEV infections are almost exclusively caused by the zoonotic genotype 3 HEV strains ( 14 ). Although the overall mortality rate associated with HEV infection is less than 1%, HEV can cause fulminant hepatitis in infected pregnant women, with a mortality rate of up to 20% to 25% ( 12 , 15 ). Currently, there is no specific treatment for HEV infection, although broad-spectrum antivirals such as ribavirin and pegylated interferon (IFN) have been used to treat chronic HEV infection in solid-organ transplant patients, which sometime can result in severe side effects, including graft rejection ( 16 ).

The mechanism behind type I IFN-mediated antiviral activity against HEV remains unclear. HEV is known to modulate the type I IFN induction pathway. Studies have shown that HEV ORF3 enhances type I IFN induction ( 17 ), while HEV ORF1 has been shown to inhibit IFN induction ( 18 ). The interferon alpha 2a (IFN-α2a) subtype is known to exert the strongest antiviral effect against HEV in vitro ( 19 ). It has been reported that type I IFN mediates a dose-dependent reduction in the viral RNA level and that HEV ORF3 inhibits type I IFN signaling in A549 cells ( 20 ). HEV has been shown to be less susceptible to type I IFN-mediated antiviral effects than the hepatitis C virus (HCV) in vitro ( 19 , 21 ). Therefore, it is important to delineate the mechanism of interactions between type I IFN and HEV to enable a better understanding of HEV pathobiology as well as development of a better prognostic use of type I IFN during HEV infection.

Type I IFNs include a multigene family of secreted cytokines. Type I IFN signaling induces expression of various IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) via the JAK-STAT pathway to establish an antiviral state. ISG15 is a type I IFN-induced ubiquitin-like protein with pleotropic functions ( 22 ). ISG15 conjugation of target proteins (i.e., ISGylation) is a sequential process involving UBE1L (E1), UBE2L6 (E2), and HERC5 (E3) ligase ( 23 ). An increase in ISG15 mRNA levels has been reported in patients chronically infected with hepatitis viruses, including HCV ( 24 ) and HEV ( 25 ). It has been reported that HEV induces ISG15 in A549 cells and hepatic cells ( 26 , 27 ), as well as in HEV-infected chimpanzee liver biopsy tissues ( 28 ). However, the role of ISG15 in viral infection remains controversial ( 22 ), as some studies have reported that ISG15 acts in an antiviral manner against human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) ( 29 ), Ebola virus ( 30 ), HCV ( 31 ), and influenza virus ( 32 ), whereas other studies showed that ISG15 also acts as a proviral during HCV infection ( 33 , 34 ). More recently, ISG15 was reported to have an immunomodulatory effect by acting as a negative regulator of type I IFN signaling, thus regulating the antiviral response during viral infection ( 35 , 36 ). An increased level of ISGs is suspected to favor the persistence of HEV infection in clinical cases ( 25 ).

Therefore, in the present study we investigated the role of ISG15 in HEV replication and determined whether ISG15 plays any potential role in type I IFN-mediated antiviral activity during HEV replication. Our results show that HEV induces ISG15 at both the mRNA level and the protein level and that ISG15 has an immunomodulatory role during HEV replication rather than a direct antiviral effect.

DISCUSSION

HEV is known to be less sensitive to the type I IFN-mediated antiviral effect than HCV ( 19 , 21 ). High baseline levels of ISG15 have been reported in populations of nonresponders to IFN therapy in patients chronically infected with HCV ( 34 , 41 ). In the present study, we demonstrated that HEV induces ISG15 and plays an important immunomodulatory role by regulating HEV sensitivity to type I IFN.

High levels of ISG15 expression have been reported in HEV infections of chimpanzee liver tissues ( 28 ), in patients with chronic HEV infection ( 25 ), and in other persistent hepatic viral infections ( 24 ). In vitro studies have also shown that HEV upregulates ISG15 expression levels in A549 and hepatic cells ( 26 , 27 ), as well as in primary cell cultures of induced pluripotent stem cell-derived hepatocytes ( 42 ). Consistent with previous reports, in this study we observed an increase in ISG15 expression at both the mRNA and protein levels in Huh7-S10-3 cells transfected with capped HEV RNA transcripts. Some clones of Huh7 cells such as Huh7.5 cells are known to be RIG-I defective; however, we found that the Huh7-S10-3 cells used in this study expressed RIG-I protein (data not shown). A recent study suggested that an antiviral response can be established independently of type I IFN ( 43 ), and an in vitro study has shown an IFN-independent mechanism of a RIG-I-mediated anti-HEV effect ( 44 ). Therefore, it is plausible that HEV may use the basal RIG-I mechanism (or another mechanism) to induce ISG15 production in hepatocytes. One of the major drawbacks of studying innate responses to HEV is the lack of an efficient infectious cell culture system. HepG2, Huh7.5, and Huh7-S10-3 hepatic cell lines are known to support differential levels of HEV replication ( 27 ). In our previous publications ( 45 , 46 ), we had used the HepG2 cell line for monitoring HEV infection; however, we found that the HEV infection level in the Huh7-S10-3 infection system is insufficient for ISG15 analyses. Hence, we estimated ISG15 levels in HEV-infected swine liver samples to substantiate our in vitro findings obtained from an in vitro viral RNA transfection-based model but not from in vitro HEV infection of Huh7-S10-3 cells.

The role of ISG15 during a viral infection is complex and is dependent on the host species ( 22 ). In vitro studies in human cell lines have shown that ISG15 implements a direct antiviral effect by inhibiting budding of the human pathogens HIV ( 15 ) and Ebola virus VP40 ( 16 ). However, ISG15-deficient populations do not seem to have impaired antiviral immunity; instead, they display higher levels of expression of ISGs and greater resistance to viral infection ( 22 , 23 ). The results from this study demonstrate that ISG15 plays an immunomodulatory role rather than a direct antiviral role during HEV replication.

ISG15 is known to mediate a direct antiviral effect via ISGylation ( 22 ); thus, we suspected that ISG15 knockdown might affect HEV replication. However, our results showed that the loss of ISG15 alone had no effect on HEV replication. A recent study has shown that overexpression of RIG-I in Huh7.5-P6 HEV cells led to induction of various ISGs (including ISG15); however, type I IFN remained at undetectable levels ( 44 ). Therefore, we speculate that the inability to detect any significant changes in HEV levels in siISG15 plus HEV compared to siCnt plus HEV cotransfected Huh7-S10-3 cells was likely due to the ability of HEV to induce an innate response in Huh7 cells independently of type I IFN production.

We further demonstrated here that loss of ISG15 resulted in an improved type I IFN signaling response to exogenous IFN-α treatment and, consequently, enhanced the type I IFN sensitivity of HEV, as observed both in the HEV P6GLuc replicon system and in the HEV P6 infectious cDNA clone system. We also observed that loss of ISGylating enzymes (UBE1L and UBE2L6) did not affect the HEV type I IFN sensitivity. It has been reported that rescuing ISG15-deficient cells with a conjugation-deficient ISG15 mutant can attenuate the type I IFN sensitivity of a cell ( 36 , 40 ). Free ISG15 is known to stabilize USP18 protein expression levels and thereby to control STAT1 signaling ( 40 ). Therefore, it is plausible that the presence of free ISG15 in UBE1L- and UBE2L6-deficient cells resulted in a decrease in levels of IFN-induced ISGs and thus may contribute to the loss of HEV type I IFN sensitivity.

Type I IFN signaling establishes an antiviral state by inducing various ISGs, each of which acts at various stages of viral replication, including early stages post-viral entry, viral transcription, translation, and/or assembly and budding ( 47 ). Thus, in this study we tested the roles of OAS1, Mx1, and PKR in the type I IFN-mediated antiviral effect against HEV. OAS1 imparts an antiviral effect via enabling viral double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) degradation in an RNase L-dependent or -independent manner ( 48 , 49 ), thereby inhibiting viral RNA replication. Mx1 is a GTPase and imparts an antiviral effect at a very early stage of viral replication, although the exact mechanism is not well understood ( 47 ). PKR is known to inhibit viral and/or host RNA translation by phosphorylating the α subunit of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2A) to prevent viral replication ( 47 ). Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in PKR and OAS1 have also been suspected to correlate with chronic viral infections ( 50 , 51 ).

In this study, we showed that PKR and OAS1 are critical in ISG15-mediated enhanced HEV sensitivity to type I IFN. We demonstrated that loss of ISG15, along with PKR, during type I IFN treatment resulted in a significant increase in GLuc levels in the HEV P6GLuc replicon system. Therefore, we suspected that loss of PKR would result in an increased level of viral protein and that this might in turn increase the intracellular viral genomic RNA replication levels. However, we did not observe a significant increase in intracellular viral RNA levels in the HEV P6 infection system, while loss of OAS1 resulted in an increase in intracellular HEV viral RNA levels in ISG15 knockdown and type I IFN-treated cells. It has been shown that, in rabies virus, loss of PKR increases viral protein levels without affecting viral mRNA levels ( 52 ). Therefore, we speculate that ISG15 may regulate the type I IFN-mediated antiviral effect against HEV in a multistep process. Both PKR and OAS1 appear to be crucial for ISG15-mediated type I IFN sensitivity to HEV, depending on the HEV study system used. Therefore, it is plausible that PKR is a critical regulator of HEV translation and that OAS1 controls HEV RNA stability in a mutually independent manner. Clearly, further studies are warranted to delineate the potential correlation of these ISGs during acute versus chronic HEV infection.

In conclusion, the results from this study suggest that ISG15 may play an important immunomodulatory role in HEV replication and that it regulates HEV sensitivity to exogenous type I IFN. Loss of ISG15 resulted in enhanced HEV type I IFN sensitivity and IFN-induced ISGs levels during HEV replication. The results also suggest that PKR and OAS1 are crucial for the ISG15-mediated IFN sensitivity of HEV, depending on the HEV study system used. Therefore, care needs to be taken in studying the IFN mechanism during HEV infection. Development of more-robust HEV infection cell culture systems is needed to enable better studies of HEV innate response interactions, as such a robust culture system would mimic ex vivo conditions during HEV replication more closely than the currently used HEV transfection-based model. Understanding the expression profile of negative regulators and the subsequent mechanism involved in the regulation of type I IFN signaling pathway, for a given disease state, would enable us to formulate a better IFN therapy regime.
