---
pmid: '10716720'
title: 'Tumorigenesis in the multiple intestinal neoplasia mouse: redundancy of negative
  regulators and specificity of modifiers.'
authors:
- Halberg RB
- Katzung DS
- Hoff PD
- Moser AR
- Cole CE
- Lubet RA
- Donehower LA
- Jacoby RF
- Dove WF
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2000'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC16262
doi: 10.1073/pnas.97.7.3461
---

# Tumorigenesis in the multiple intestinal neoplasia mouse: redundancy of negative regulators and specificity of modifiers.
**Authors:** Halberg RB, Katzung DS, Hoff PD, Moser AR, Cole CE, Lubet RA, Donehower LA, Jacoby RF, Dove WF
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.97.7.3461](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.97.7.3461)
**PMC:** [PMC16262](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC16262/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Mar 28;97(7):3461-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.97.7.3461.

Tumorigenesis in the multiple intestinal neoplasia mouse: redundancy of negative 
regulators and specificity of modifiers.

Halberg RB(1), Katzung DS, Hoff PD, Moser AR, Cole CE, Lubet RA, Donehower LA, 
Jacoby RF, Dove WF.

Author information:
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Biostatistics, 
University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

The interaction between mutations in the tumor-suppressor genes Apc and p53 was 
studied in congenic mouse strains to minimize the influence of polymorphic 
modifiers. The multiplicity and invasiveness of intestinal adenomas of 
Apc(Min/+) (Min) mice was enhanced by deficiency for p53. In addition, the 
occurrence of desmoid fibromas was strongly enhanced by p53 deficiency. The 
genetic modifier Mom1 and the pharmacological agents piroxicam and 
difluoromethylornithine each reduced intestinal adenoma multiplicity in the 
absence of p53 function. Mom1 showed no influence on the development of desmoid 
fibromas, whereas the combination of piroxicam and difluoromethylornithine 
exerted a moderate effect. The ensemble of tumor suppressors and modifiers of a 
neoplastic process can be usefully analyzed in respect to tissue specificity and 
synergy.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.97.7.3461
PMCID: PMC16262
PMID: 10716720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The interaction between mutations in the tumor-suppressor genes Apc and p53 was studied in congenic mouse strains to minimize the influence of polymorphic modifiers. The multiplicity and invasiveness of intestinal adenomas of Apc Min/+ (Min) mice was enhanced by deficiency for p53 . In addition, the occurrence of desmoid fibromas was strongly enhanced by p53 deficiency. The genetic modifier Mom1 and the pharmacological agents piroxicam and difluoromethylornithine each reduced intestinal adenoma multiplicity in the absence of p53 function. Mom1 showed no influence on the development of desmoid fibromas, whereas the combination of piroxicam and difluoromethylornithine exerted a moderate effect. The ensemble of tumor suppressors and modifiers of a neoplastic process can be usefully analyzed in respect to tissue specificity and synergy.

Discussion

We are analyzing the genetic network controlling intestinal neoplasia in the laboratory mouse to further a fundamental understanding of human colon cancer. One of the mysteries in the development of human colon cancer is its nonlinear age dependence, fitted to a six-hit process ( 21 ). One strategy to identify the elements contributing to such a multihit process is to generate mice carrying germline mutations of candidate tumor-suppressor genes and to observe strong enhancement of neoplasia. The candidates currently available for such a test are the genes of the mouse homologous to those mutated in familial or sporadic colon cancer in the human. An impediment to a rigorous test of cooperation between negative regulators is the creation of heterogeneous genetic backgrounds when the distinct mutations are carried on different inbred backgrounds. This heterogeneity creates genetic variation for polymorphic modifiers of the phenotype ( 7 , 15 , 22 ) that can obscure any cooperation. This study has utilized congenic derivatives of a single inbred strain, B6, to detect cooperation between p53 and Apc in suppressing intestinal adenoma formation (Table 1 ) and progression (Fig. 1 ). More impressively, strong cooperation has been detected between these negative regulators in suppressing desmoid fibromas of the skeletal muscle wall (Fig. 2 ; Table 2 ).

Strong cooperation between distinct negative regulators of neoplasia (“tumor suppressors”) can provide a basis for multihit cancer development with a kinetic order higher than the two-hit process hypothesized by Knudson ( 23 ). Such a higher-order process may contain within it the canonical two-hit/one-locus process developed for retinoblastoma and the retinoblastoma gene in the human ( 24 ) and intestinal adenoma formation in the mouse ( 25 ). These simpler cases may fit the “Gatekeeper Hypothesis,” in which a single negative regulator controls the neoplastic potential of a particular cell type ( 11 ). However, a more general understanding of neoplasia in mammals must recognize instances of redundant regulation, such as that between p53 and Apc in controlling desmoid fibromas (Table 2 ) and that between p53 and Rb in controlling endocrine tumors ( 26 ).

The APC/Apc gene is expressed very broadly throughout mammals ( 27 ). The restricted spectrum of neoplasms found in humans and mice carrying germline mutations in APC/Apc could be explained by cooperation with other negative regulators. However, the p53 gene is not an obvious candidate for fulfilling such a role, because it appears to be constitutively expressed in only a few cell types ( 3 , 4 ), becoming more broadly active under several conditions of stress ( 28 , 29 ). Several possibilities can be considered for the involvement of p53 function in the development of invasive intestinal tumors and desmoid fibromas. The p53 gene may be constitutively active in the precursors of these neoplasms. Note that Li-Fraumeni patients carrying germline mutations in the p53 gene usually develop soft tissue sarcomas of mesenchymal origin ( 30 ). Alternatively, the p53 gene may be induced as the neoplasm is initiated. The loss of APC/Apc activity in the tumor might lead to the activation of the c- Myc protooncogene ( 31 ), which in turn might activate p53 via sequential steps of negative regulation from p19ARF to Mdm2 to p53 ( 32 , 33 ). If this process activates p53 -dependent apoptosis, then a deficiency of p53 would enhance tumor formation.

Other testable mechanisms for interaction between Apc and p53 can be proposed. The p53 transcription factor is required for Apc expression in vitro ( 34 ), so a deficiency of p53 may lead to silencing of Apc expression ( 35 ) and enhanced adenoma formation. A molecular analysis of the status of the wild-type Apc allele in the tumors that arise in Min mice lacking p53 may be informative. Indirect modes of interaction are also conceivable and testable, involving any of the polypeptides known to interact with APC/Apc ( 36 ) or any of the genes known to be regulated by p53 activity or polypeptides known to interact with p53 ( 28 , 29 , 37 ).

Beyond the negative regulatory genes of neoplasia, APC/Apc and p53, the modifier gene Mom1 encoding the secretory phospholipase Pla2g2a and the pharmacological agents piroxicam and DFMO must be placed in the network of interactions controlling neoplasia. The activity of each of these factors leads to a reduction in net growth rate of the adenomas of Min mice ( 12 , 38 ). The modifying effect of Mom1 is tissue specific, affecting only the intestinal phenotype of the Min mouse. Early insight into the selective action of modifiers in pleiotropic cancer syndromes has been reported for familial neurofibromatosis type I ( 39 ).

Two questions are important in assessing these modifying agents for chemoprevention or therapy of tumors. Is the effect on growth rate lost in p53 -deficient tumors? Clearly both Mom1 and the piroxicam/DFMO combination are active against intestinal adenomas under p53 -deficient conditions (Tables 1 and 2 ). Is there synergistic action between modifiers? It has been found previously that the treatment of Min mice with the combination of piroxicam plus DFMO is much more effective than either agent alone, resulting in a significant number of tumor-free mice ( 12 ). These findings of successful combination chemoprevention pertain to Min mice on the B6 genetic background, deficient in the secretory phospholipase Pla2g2a. Finding that Mom1 resistance is also independent of p53 function points to the importance of investigating whether the secretory phospholipase or one of the products of its action will synergize with piroxicam/DFMO to give complete chemoprevention and/or therapy for adenomatous polyps. A parallel study has found p53 independence and strong synergy between the modifiers of intestinal tumors, Mom1 and Dnmt (R. T. Cormier and W.F.D., unpublished work). Single factors, each with a small effect on a disease process, can be combined usefully.
