---
pmid: '27728808'
title: Enhancing the Cytotoxic Effects of PARP Inhibitors with DNA Demethylating Agents
  - A Potential Therapy for Cancer.
authors:
- Muvarak NE
- Chowdhury K
- Xia L
- Robert C
- Choi EY
- Cai Y
- Bellani M
- Zou Y
- Singh ZN
- Duong VH
- Rutherford T
- Nagaria P
- Bentzen SM
- Seidman MM
- Baer MR
- Lapidus RG
- Baylin SB
- Rassool FV
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5201166
doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2016.09.002
---

# Enhancing the Cytotoxic Effects of PARP Inhibitors with DNA Demethylating Agents - A Potential Therapy for Cancer.
**Authors:** Muvarak NE, Chowdhury K, Xia L, Robert C, Choi EY, Cai Y, Bellani M, Zou Y, Singh ZN, Duong VH, Rutherford T, Nagaria P, Bentzen SM, Seidman MM, Baer MR, Lapidus RG, Baylin SB, Rassool FV
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccell.2016.09.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2016.09.002)
**PMC:** [PMC5201166](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5201166/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2016 Oct 10;30(4):637-650. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2016.09.002.

Enhancing the Cytotoxic Effects of PARP Inhibitors with DNA Demethylating Agents 
- A Potential Therapy for Cancer.

Muvarak NE(1), Chowdhury K(1), Xia L(2), Robert C(1), Choi EY(3), Cai Y(2), 
Bellani M(4), Zou Y(5), Singh ZN(5), Duong VH(3), Rutherford T(6), Nagaria P(1), 
Bentzen SM(7), Seidman MM(4), Baer MR(8), Lapidus RG(3), Baylin SB(9), Rassool 
FV(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 
21201, USA; University of Maryland Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Cancer Center, 
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(2)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins Medical 
Institutions, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
MD 21201, USA; University of Maryland Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Cancer 
Center, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, 
MD 21224, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(6)Stevenson University, Stevenson, MD 21153, USA.
(7)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 
21201, USA; Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
MD 21201, USA; University of Maryland Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Cancer 
Center, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA; Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Baltimore, MD 
21201, USA.
(9)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins Medical 
Institutions, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA; Van Andel Research Institute, Grand 
Rapids, MI 49503.
(10)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 
21201, USA; University of Maryland Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Cancer Center, 
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. Electronic address: frassool@som.umaryland.edu.

Comment in
    Sci Transl Med. 2016 Nov 16;8(365):365ec182. doi: 
10.1126/scitranslmed.aal0070.

Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors (PARPis) are clinically effective 
predominantly for BRCA-mutant tumors. We introduce a mechanism-based strategy to 
enhance PARPi efficacy based on DNA damage-related binding between DNA 
methyltransferases (DNMTs) and PARP1. In acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and breast 
cancer cells, DNMT inhibitors (DNMTis) alone covalently bind DNMTs into DNA and 
increase PARP1 tightly bound into chromatin. Low doses of DNMTis plus PARPis, 
versus each drug alone, increase PARPi efficacy, increasing amplitude and 
retention of PARP1 directly at laser-induced DNA damage sites. This correlates 
with increased DNA damage, synergistic tumor cytotoxicity, blunting of 
self-renewal, and strong anti-tumor responses, in vivo in unfavorable AML 
subtypes and BRCA wild-type breast cancer cells. Our combinatorial approach 
introduces a strategy to enhance efficacy of PARPis in treating cancer.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccell.2016.09.002
PMCID: PMC5201166
PMID: 27728808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURES C.R., F.V.R. and S.B.B. share 
co-inventor ship on US Provisional Patent Application Number: 61/929,680 for the 
concept of the combinatorial therapy.

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

PARPis are a very exciting spectrum of drugs currently used in the clinic in cancer management. Overall, the therapy works through interfering with how PARP functions in allowing cancer cells to survive ongoing DNA damage. In this regard, PARP1 is an abundant nuclear protein that senses and contributes to repair of DNA single-strand breaks (SSBs) ( De Vos et al., 2012 ). PARP1 is also active in repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) ( Audebert et al., 2004 ), working through catalyzing poly-ADP-ribosylation of itself, histones and other target proteins ( Gibson and Kraus, 2012 ). In particular, PARP1 is involved in a highly error-prone form of DSB repair, alternative non-homologous end-joining (ALT NHEJ) ( Nussenzweig and Nussenzweig, 2007 ; Rassool and Tomkinson, 2010 ). Both expression of PARP1 and ALT NHEJ activity are increased in breast cancer and leukemia cells, compared with non-tumorigenic counterparts ( Ha et al., 2014 ; Tobin et al., 2012a ; Tobin et al., 2012b ). Blocking the catalytic activity of PARP1 has been shown to inhibit BER repair, resulting in accumulation of SSBs, as well as DSBs, during replication ( Mariano et al., 2015 ), and this damage in turn activates homologous recombination (HR) ( Chevanne et al., 2010 ). Recent studies have shown that disruptions of any HR-related pathway ( Mateo et al., 2015 ), such as by BRCA mutations, and disruption of Fanconi Anemia (FA) ( D’Andrea, 2010 ) and ATM genes ( Murai et al., 2012 ), can predict sensitivity and tumor cytotoxicity to PARP1 inhibition by small molecule inhibitors. Additionally, blocking PARP1 in combination with another ALT NHEJ protein, DNA ligase IIIα, in multiple cancers results in significant reduction of ALT NHEJ activity, leading to increased cytotoxic DSBs and cell death ( Ceccaldi et al., 2015 ; Ha et al., 2014 ; Tobin et al., 2012a ; Tobin et al., 2012b ).

Particularly important with respect to the future of PARPis in cancer therapy are the recent advances in understanding how and where, at a molecular level, these agents best work as cytotoxic agents, and recent progress in developing the best reagents. Substantial efficacy has been shown with clinically available PARPis, especially for treatment of breast and ovarian cancers in patients with hereditary deletions of the HR BRCA1/2 genes. Cancers presenting with such mutations represent 5–10% of all triple-negative breast cancers (estrogen, progesterone and HER2 receptor negative breast cancers ;TNBCs) ( Bryant et al., 2005 ; Farmer et al., 2005 ; Guastafierro et al., 2008 ; Pedersen-Bjergaard et al., 2006 ). However, responses to PARPi therapy, even in BRCA-mutant breast cancers, have not been highly durable. Furthermore, PARPis have failed to show impressive clinical benefit for patients with sporadic TNBCs ( Guha, 2011 ) and/or other cancers, suggesting the necessity for developing new strategies to maximize the efficacy for using these agents, which is the focus of the present paper.

PARP-DNA complexing by PARPi is proposed to be a direct interaction between DNA and PARP1 via the DNA-binding site of the latter ( Horton and Wilson, 2013 ; Murai et al., 2014 ). A key for the above need for improving PARPi therapy is the recent development of new PARPis with much increased potency, such as BMN 673 (talazoparib) ( Shen et al., 2015 ). The primary cytotoxic effect of PARPis has been correlated with trapping of cytotoxic DNA-PARP1 complexes at sites of DNA damage ( Murai et al., 2012 ). Biochemically, PARP1/2 are trapped at 5’-dRP lesions generated during BER steps under PARPi treatment ( Murai et al., 2012 ). Moreover, and with particular importance to our present work, increases in the amplitude and duration of this trapping appear to be key parameters for efficacy of PARPis. This is well reflected in the fact that up to 100-fold greater inhibitory activity is associated with the increased ability of the new and strongest PARPi, talazoparib, to trap DNA-PARP1 complexes, compared to weaker PARPis such as veliparib (ABT888) ( Shen et al., 2015 ).

DNA methyltransferase inhibitors (DNMTis) are approved by the Food and drug administration (FDA) for treatment of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) ( Kantarjian et al., 2006 ) and are used for treatment of AML as well ( Carbone et al., 2006 ; Issa et al., 2004 ; Zampieri et al., 2012 ). These agents, including 5-azacytidine (AZA) and decitabine (DAC), are potent inhibitors of DNA methylation and DNMTs [reviewed in ( Tsai et al., 2012 )]. Reversing the gene expression changes associated with DNA methylation abnormalities in cancer is one proposed mechanism for the clinical efficacy of DNMTis ( Baylin and Jones, 2011 ; Issa, 2007 ). Moreover, DNMTis become incorporated into replicating DNA as an altered cytosine base and covalently bind DNMTs, creating a cytotoxic DNMT-DNA complex while simultaneously triggering the degradation of soluble DNMT’s ( Patel et al., 2010 ). In the current study, we explore the use of these two classes of drugs together as a potential therapy for TNBCs and AML.

DISCUSSION

While substantial efficacy has been shown with clinically available PARPis in treatment of breast and/or ovarian cancers in patients with hereditary deletions of BRCA1/2 ( Farmer et al., 2005 ), the high promise of these drugs has not yet been realized for non-BRCA1/2-defective cancers ( Westman et al., 2013 ). This has spurred the development of a generation of potent PARPis, such as talazoparib, that are in late-stage clinical trials ( Shen et al., 2013 ). As previously noted, these most potent PARPis induce cytotoxicity proportional to the amplitude and duration of PARP1 trapping in chromatin ( Murai et al., 2012 ; Shen et al., 2015 ). We now take advantage of the ability of DNMTis to increase tight binding of PARP1 into chromatin, based on the following data: 1) DNMTs and PARP1 interact ( Reale et al., 2005 ); 2) DNMTis covalently bind DNMTs into DNA ( Ghoshal and Bai, 2007 ) and this can occur at sites of DNA damage ( O’Hagan et al., 2011 ) and thus can enhance PARP1 recruitment and tight binding to chromatin; and 3) These interactions allow DNMTis to be combined with potent PARPis such as talazoparib to increase tight binding of PARP1 in chromatin, increase the presence and retention of PARP1 and DNMT1 at DNA damage sites, and enhance cytotoxic effects in TNBC and AML cells in vitro and in vivo . These dynamics allow design of a combinatorial treatment strategy with the potential for clinical efficacy in treating patients with TNBCs with intact BRCA genes and poor-prognosis AML patients.

With special reference to AML therapy, there have been over three decades of clinical efforts to improve outcomes in this disease by increasing the intensity of chemotherapy ( Pachauri et al., 2012 ). However, patients with unfavorable AML subtypes or with refractory or relapsed AML continue to do poorly, and less than 10% achieve long-term survival ( Kumar, 2011 ). DNMTis are frequently used to treat AML patients unlikely to respond to conventional chemotherapy ( Fenaux, 2005 ) following their FDA approval for the treatment of MDS ( Ghoshal and Bai, 2007 ). Most recently, SGI-110, a pro-drug for DAC, has been developed as a novel potent DNMTi, with a response rate of 55% in untreated AML patients unfit for intensive chemotherapy ( Paccosi et al., 2012 ), but only 16% in refractory and relapsed AML patients ( Issa et al., 2015 ). Thus, the efficacy of DNMTis needs to be augmented by combination with other therapies, and PARPis appear to be good candidates. Importantly, PARPis alone have not shown any efficacy in AML, and our data suggest that combining them with DNMTis could give PARPis a place in management of AML and other cancers. In this regard, synergistic tumor cytotoxicity of both drugs at very low doses appears to provide good tolerability in our in vivo pre-clinical models, even though each drug alone can induce bone marrow toxicity ( Issa et al., 2004 ; Kantarjian et al., 2013 ; Underhill et al., 2011 ). This is emphasized by the fact that the best survival results for both TNBC and AML occurred when we used the lowest doses of talazoparib and AZA.

In terms of mechanisms underlying the efficacy of our combined treatment paradigm, there are important insights from the present study, and the findings will certainly be expanded in future work. All of our present data are consistent with the key hypothesis underlying our model that the DNMTis and PARPis combine to increase the amplitude and duration of DNMT1 and PARP1 at sites of laser-induced DNA damage that include both SSB’s and DSB’s. It is apparent that these dynamics may well underlie our observed synergistic effects on tumor cell cytotoxicity.

PARP1 is known to be recruited to DNA damage sites and to be covalently trapped by PARPis specifically at SSB’s, and most potently by talazoparib ( Murai et al., 2012 ; Shen et al., 2015 ). Importantly for our model, DNMTis covalently trap for prolonged periods of time DNMT’s at CpG sites in DNA ( Oz et al., 2014 ). Thus, following treatment with these agents, it would be expected that some of the DNA at our laser induced damage sites, which induces both SSB’s and DSB’s, would include DNA with incorporated DNMTi, and thus, covalently-bound DNMT’s. It is to this DNA bound DNMT’s that we propose interacting PARP1 is bound and would be increased in chromatin and possibly also provide for increased amounts of this latter protein to be formally trapped by PARPis at SSB’s. In fact, as shown by our shRNA studies of both DNMT1 and PARP1 in combination inhibitor treatment with laser damage induction there is an interdependency between DNMT1 and PARP1 required for retention of PARP1 at DNA damage sites at later time points after DNA damage induction. With respect to the above dynamics, several points are key to the interactions between DNMT1 and PARP1 for chromatin binding of each and potential for formal trapping of the latter by PARPis at DNA damage sites. First, we have previously shown that DNMT1 is recruited directly to both sites of induced DSBs ( O’Hagan et al., 2008 ) and sites involved with 8-oxo-guanosine adducts induced by increased cellular ROS ( O’Hagan et al., 2011 ). The latter is particularly key for our present findings in that the DNMT1 recruitment is associated, as part of a large protein complex which enlarges after damage, and with a tightening to chromatin, especially for DNMT1, which is highly salt resistant ( O’Hagan et al., 2011 ). Upstream of this binding are DNA damage proteins including mismatch repair proteins ( Ding et al., 2015 ) and the BER protein OGG1 ( O’Hagan et al., 2011 ). Thus, it is well possible that some of the DNMTi-enhanced binding of PARP1 into chromatin could well be formally trapped at DNA damage sites, including SSB’s, when the DNMTi and PARPi are combined.

With respect to the above possibilities, other mechanistic considerations may apply which may be contributing without being mutually exclusive. Possibly, combination treatment leads, as shown by the timing in the laser induction studies, to a marked delay in repair of DNA damage that could be independent of the above discussed DNMT1 covalent binding to DNA induced by DNMT is and subsequent direct interactions with PARP1. This delayed, impaired, and ongoing damage repair could in and of itself contribute to the increased amplitude and duration of localization of both DNMT1 and PARP at the damage sites. We previously reported that sporadic TNBCs with intact BRCA genes are dependent on an alternative and highly error-prone form of non-homologous end-joining, ALT NHEJ ( Tobin et al., 2012a ). Retention of PARP1 and DNMT1 at DSBs may prevent access of ALT NHEJ factors to DSB sites, leading to decreased ALT NHEJ repair. In addition to activation of HR ( Chevanne et al., 2010 ), PARPis administered singly also increase classical non-homologous end joining (c-NHEJ) activity through inhibition of Ku protein PARylation and increased DNA-PK phosphorylation ( Patel et al., 2011 ). In contrast, DNMTi treatment alone does not affect c-NHEJ ( Moscariello and Iliakis, 2013 ). Recent reports do suggest that treatment with AZA at much higher doses than employed in our present study induces DNA damage lesions that are recognized by the BER machinery ( Orta et al., 2014 ). Thus, some of the enhanced cytotoxicity induced by our drug combination could stem from disrupting BER of incorporated DNMTis. As we have previously shown ( Tsai et al., 2012 ), and also found here, during the time of administration, DNMTis at the low concentrations employed do not appear over 72 hr to generate significant DNA damage.

As mentioned, none of the mechanisms above may be mutually exclusive, and they may have summation effects. It is clear from our overall results that our combination approach enhances the parameters that facilitate the efficacy of PARPis and the high potential as a therapeutic approach paradigm. It is important to remember that while all of our present studies pinpoint actions of our dual treatment strategy directly at DSB’s, low dose DNMTi treatment also effects DNA methylation changes ( Tsai et al, 2012 ). Downstream responses to these triggering events may also link to DNA damage repair changes and augment the pathways and events studied above to explain our combinatorial drug effects ( Tsai et al., 2012 ). Thus, DNMTi treatment may induce a BRCAness phenotype that contributes to synthetic lethality with PARPis in AML and TNBC cells ( Wiegmans et al., 2015 ).

In summary, our preclinical data in AML cell lines, primary cells, and mouse xenografts, as outlined in this study, suggest the potential for improving the clinical efficacies of both DNMTis and PARPis by combining low doses of both drugs for patients with AML. Moreover, our initial data suggest that the poor-prognosis subgroups of AML, including AML with FLT3/ITD, constituting at least a third of AML cases, are likely to be sensitive to our therapeutic approach. We are already translating the combination paradigm into an upcoming clinical trial for AML. This is designed to test whether low doses of DNMTis ( Issa and Kantarjian, 2005a ; Issa and Kantarjian, 2005b ) and the PARPi talazoparib can be safely combined, and then to test whether this combination therapy shows efficacy for contributing to the management of newly diagnosed AML patients unfit for intensive chemotherapy and patients with relapsed/refractory AML. Our present results in breast cancer cells may also lay the groundwork for similar combination trials in this and other solid tumors.
