---
pmid: '8940105'
title: New 5' regions of the murine and human genes for DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase.
authors:
- Yoder JA
- Yen RW
- Vertino PM
- Bestor TH
- Baylin SB
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.49.31092
---

# New 5' regions of the murine and human genes for DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase.
**Authors:** Yoder JA, Yen RW, Vertino PM, Bestor TH, Baylin SB
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.49.31092](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.49.31092)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 6;271(49):31092-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.49.31092.

New 5' regions of the murine and human genes for DNA 
(cytosine-5)-methyltransferase.

Yoder JA(1), Yen RW, Vertino PM, Bestor TH, Baylin SB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA. THB12@columbia.edu

DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferases (EC 2.1.1.37) maintain patterns of 
methylated cytosine residues in the mammalian genome; faithful maintenance of 
methylation patterns is required for normal development of mice, and aberrant 
methylation patterns are associated with certain human tumors and developmental 
abnormalities. The organization of coding sequences at the 5'-end of the murine 
and human DNA methyltransferase genes was investigated, and the DNA 
methyltransferase open reading frame was found to be longer than previously 
suspected. Expression of the complete open reading frame by in vitro 
transcription-translation and by transfection of expression constructs into COS7 
cells resulted in the production of an active DNA methyltransferase of the same 
apparent mass as the endogenous protein, while translation from the second 
in-frame ATG codon produced a slightly smaller but fully active protein. 
Characterization of mRNA 5' sequences and the intron-exon structure of the 5' 
region of the murine and human genes indicated that a previously described 
promoter element (Rouleau, J., Tanigawa, G., and Szyf, M. (1992) J. Biol. Chem. 
267, 7368-7377) actually lies in an intron that is more than 5 kilobases 
downstream of the transcription start sites.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.49.31092
PMID: 8940105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
