---
pmid: '26405230'
title: DNA tumor virus oncogenes antagonize the cGAS-STING DNA-sensing pathway.
authors:
- Lau L
- Gray EE
- Brunette RL
- Stetson DB
journal: Science
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.aab3291
---

# DNA tumor virus oncogenes antagonize the cGAS-STING DNA-sensing pathway.
**Authors:** Lau L, Gray EE, Brunette RL, Stetson DB
**Journal:** Science (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.aab3291](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aab3291)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2015 Oct 30;350(6260):568-71. doi: 10.1126/science.aab3291. Epub 2015
 Sep 24.

DNA tumor virus oncogenes antagonize the cGAS-STING DNA-sensing pathway.

Lau L(1), Gray EE(1), Brunette RL(1), Stetson DB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(2)Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA 98109, USA. stetson@uw.edu.

Cyclic guanosine monophosphate-adenosine monophosphate synthase (cGAS) detects 
intracellular DNA and signals through the adapter protein STING to initiate the 
antiviral response to DNA viruses. Whether DNA viruses can prevent activation of 
the cGAS-STING pathway remains largely unknown. Here, we identify the oncogenes 
of the DNA tumor viruses, including E7 from human papillomavirus (HPV) and E1A 
from adenovirus, as potent and specific inhibitors of the cGAS-STING pathway. We 
show that the LXCXE motif of these oncoproteins, which is essential for blockade 
of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor, is also important for antagonizing DNA 
sensing. E1A and E7 bind to STING, and silencing of these oncogenes in human 
tumor cells restores the cGAS-STING pathway. Our findings reveal a host-virus 
conflict that may have shaped the evolution of viral oncogenes.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/science.aab3291
PMID: 26405230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
