---
pmid: '9007256'
title: Zebrafish pigmentation mutations and the processes of neural crest development.
authors:
- Kelsh RN
- Brand M
- Jiang YJ
- Heisenberg CP
- Lin S
- Haffter P
- Odenthal J
- Mullins MC
- van Eeden FJ
- Furutani-Seiki M
- Granato M
- Hammerschmidt M
- Kane DA
- Warga RM
- Beuchle D
- Vogelsang L
- Nüsslein-Volhard C
journal: Development
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.123.1.369
---

# Zebrafish pigmentation mutations and the processes of neural crest development.
**Authors:** Kelsh RN, Brand M, Jiang YJ, Heisenberg CP, Lin S, Haffter P, Odenthal J, Mullins MC, van Eeden FJ, Furutani-Seiki M, Granato M, Hammerschmidt M, Kane DA, Warga RM, Beuchle D, Vogelsang L, Nüsslein-Volhard C
**Journal:** Development (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.123.1.369](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.123.1.369)

## Abstract

1. Development. 1996 Dec;123:369-89. doi: 10.1242/dev.123.1.369.

Zebrafish pigmentation mutations and the processes of neural crest development.

Kelsh RN(1), Brand M, Jiang YJ, Heisenberg CP, Lin S, Haffter P, Odenthal J, 
Mullins MC, van Eeden FJ, Furutani-Seiki M, Granato M, Hammerschmidt M, Kane DA, 
Warga RM, Beuchle D, Vogelsang L, Nüsslein-Volhard C.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Entwicklungsbiologie, Abteilung Genetik, Tübingen, 
Germany. kelsh@uoneuro.uoregon.edu

Neural crest development involves cell-fate specification, proliferation, 
patterned cell migration, survival and differentiation. Zebrafish neural crest 
derivatives include three distinct chromatophores, which are well-suited to 
genetic analysis of their development. As part of a large-scale mutagenesis 
screen for embryonic/early larval mutations, we have isolated 285 mutations 
affecting all aspects of zebrafish larval pigmentation. By complementation 
analysis, we define 94 genes. We show here that comparison of their phenotypes 
permits classification of these mutations according to the types of defects they 
cause, and these suggest which process of neural crest development is probably 
affected. Mutations in eight genes affect the number of chromatophores: these 
include strong candidates for genes necessary for the processes of pigment cell 
specification and proliferation. Mutations in five genes remove part of the 
wild-type pigment pattern, and suggest a role in larval pigment pattern 
formation. Mutations in five genes show ectopic chromatophores in distinct 
sites, and may have implications for chromatophore patterning and proliferation. 
76 genes affect pigment or morphology of one or more chromatophore types: these 
mutations include strong candidates for genes important in various aspects of 
chromatophore differentiation and survival. In combination with the 
embryological advantages of zebrafish, these mutations should permit cellular 
and molecular dissection of many aspects of neural crest development.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.123.1.369
PMID: 9007256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
