---
pmid: '33961781'
title: Dual proteome-scale networks reveal cell-specific remodeling of the human interactome.
authors:
- Huttlin EL
- Bruckner RJ
- Navarrete-Perea J
- Cannon JR
- Baltier K
- Gebreab F
- Gygi MP
- Thornock A
- Zarraga G
- Tam S
- Szpyt J
- Gassaway BM
- Panov A
- Parzen H
- Fu S
- Golbazi A
- Maenpaa E
- Stricker K
- Guha Thakurta S
- Zhang T
- Rad R
- Pan J
- Nusinow DP
- Paulo JA
- Schweppe DK
- Vaites LP
- Harper JW
- Gygi SP
journal: Cell
year: '2021'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC8165030
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.011
---

# Dual proteome-scale networks reveal cell-specific remodeling of the human interactome.
**Authors:** Huttlin EL, Bruckner RJ, Navarrete-Perea J, Cannon JR, Baltier K, Gebreab F, Gygi MP, Thornock A, Zarraga G, Tam S, Szpyt J, Gassaway BM, Panov A, Parzen H, Fu S, Golbazi A, Maenpaa E, Stricker K, Guha Thakurta S, Zhang T, Rad R, Pan J, Nusinow DP, Paulo JA, Schweppe DK, Vaites LP, Harper JW, Gygi SP
**Journal:** Cell (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.011)
**PMC:** [PMC8165030](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8165030/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2021 May 27;184(11):3022-3040.e28. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.011. Epub
 2021 May 6.

Dual proteome-scale networks reveal cell-specific remodeling of the human 
interactome.

Huttlin EL(1), Bruckner RJ(2), Navarrete-Perea J(2), Cannon JR(2), Baltier K(2), 
Gebreab F(2), Gygi MP(2), Thornock A(2), Zarraga G(2), Tam S(2), Szpyt J(2), 
Gassaway BM(2), Panov A(2), Parzen H(2), Fu S(2), Golbazi A(2), Maenpaa E(2), 
Stricker K(2), Guha Thakurta S(2), Zhang T(2), Rad R(2), Pan J(3), Nusinow 
DP(2), Paulo JA(2), Schweppe DK(2), Vaites LP(2), Harper JW(4), Gygi SP(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
Electronic address: edward_huttlin@hms.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
Electronic address: wade_harper@hms.harvard.edu.
(5)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
Electronic address: steven_gygi@hms.harvard.edu.

Thousands of interactions assemble proteins into modules that impart spatial and 
functional organization to the cellular proteome. Through affinity-purification 
mass spectrometry, we have created two proteome-scale, cell-line-specific 
interaction networks. The first, BioPlex 3.0, results from affinity purification 
of 10,128 human proteins-half the proteome-in 293T cells and includes 118,162 
interactions among 14,586 proteins. The second results from 5,522 
immunoprecipitations in HCT116 cells. These networks model the interactome whose 
structure encodes protein function, localization, and complex membership. 
Comparison across cell lines validates thousands of interactions and reveals 
extensive customization. Whereas shared interactions reside in core complexes 
and involve essential proteins, cell-specific interactions link these complexes, 
"rewiring" subnetworks within each cell's interactome. Interactions covary among 
proteins of shared function as the proteome remodels to produce each cell's 
phenotype. Viewable interactively online through BioPlexExplorer, these networks 
define principles of proteome organization and enable unknown protein 
characterization.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.011
PMCID: PMC8165030
PMID: 33961781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests J.W.H. is a founder and 
scientific advisory board member of Caraway Therapeutics and a Founding 
Scientific Advisor for Interline Therapeutics.

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

While a cell’s genetic inheritance is fixed, its proteome adapts to external and internal cues, fostering great diversity of form and function that drives multicellular life. Myriad physical interactions assemble proteins into modules that impart spatial and functional organization and define the interactome, a network whose topology encodes each protein’s cellular environment and whose structure varies with cell state. Defining the repertoire of protein interactions and the conditions in which they occur is thus essential to understand proteome and cellular diversity.

Despite its importance, a complete map of the human interactome remains elusive due to several challenges: 1) the innumerable proteins, isoforms, and post-translational states within the proteome; 2) the biochemical properties of individual proteins; 3) variable protein expression; 4) the prevalence of transient interactions; and 5) interaction context dependence. Existing interaction profiling methods have only partially addressed these challenges. Binary methods including yeast-two-hybrid assays excel at screening large libraries, though interacting protein pairs must be detected in isolation within a foreign cellular environment ( Rolland et al., 2014 ). Alternatively, co-fractionation detects protein interactions in native complexes, subject to limits of sensitivity, dynamic range, and resolution of fractionation ( Havugimana et al., 2012 ; Wan et al., 2015 ). In contrast, affinity-purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS) enables enrichment and detection of even low-abundance proteins, though exogenous expression of tagged baits is required, and extensive sample preparation has limited scalability while precluding recovery of transient interactions ( Gingras et al., 2007 ). Approaches that combine datasets ( Drew et al., 2017 , 2020 ) or mine literature ( Oughtred et al., 2018 ) can compensate for limitations of individual approaches, though experimental context may be lost ( Stacey et al., 2018 ). Thus, our view of the interactome remains static and fragmentary. While our understanding of interactome dynamics is especially limited, context-dependent interactions enable cells to adapt to variable environments and create the cellular diversity that drives tissue-specific function and disease susceptibility. Such conditional interactions combine with protein expression, localization, and post-translational modifications – the proteotype – to biochemically link genotype to phenotype.

Though no single methodology can overcome all limitations, AP-MS excels for profiling interactomes – including yeast ( Gavin et al., 2002 ; Ho et al., 2002 ; Krogan et al., 2006 ), Drosophila ( Guruharsha et al., 2011 ), and human ( Hein et al., 2015 ) – due to its sensitivity and its ability to detect interactions in appropriate cellular contexts. Thus, we have established a robust AP-MS platform, generating BioPlex 1.0 and 2.0 ( Huttlin et al., 2015 , 2017 ). Here we present BioPlex 3.0, the most complete model of the human interactome to date, accompanied by a second interaction network acquired in HCT116 cells. Individually, each network encodes protein function and reveals fundamental principles of interactome organization. In tandem, these cell-specific interaction networks begin to reveal how interactomes vary with cellular state. Together, they depict shared and cell-specific modules with characteristic biological properties that often align with the unique phenotypes of each cell line. In combination, they enable biological discovery, revealing physical interactions and suggesting functions for thousands of proteins. Both networks are viewable interactively through BioPlex Explorer.

DISCUSSION

With hundreds of cell types existing in myriad states, human cell biology is diverse and specialized. This is achieved through customization of each cell’s proteotype, fine-tuning protein expression, localization, post-translational modifications, and interactions to achieve the desired phenotype. Thus, defining interactome structure and dynamics is required to understand cellular diversity. Deploying affinity enrichment at scale to profile protein interactions has advanced these goals two-fold.

First, we have profiled interactions with singular depth and breadth. While this is mostly due to targeting over half the human proteome for AP-MS in 293T cells, repeating AP-MS in HCT116 cells has revealed additional cell-specific modules. Such context-specific interactions are important, as current knowledge favors core complexes. Maximizing coverage enhances network quality – affirming associations via repeated co-purification – and enables discovery, as BioPlex suggests function, localization, and complex membership for thousands of proteins, many uncharacterized.

Second, performing AP-MS in 293T and HCT116 cells has enabled comparison of two context-specific, proteome-scale interaction networks. Though it has been long recognized that interactions vary with context, our understanding of interactome dynamics remains rudimentary. These networks have revealed widespread reorganization. Whereas shared interactions reside in dense subnetworks and preferentially link consistently expressed, often essential proteins with long evolutionary histories, cell-specific interactions span disparate network components, coupling variably expressed proteins in context-specific configurations. Interactions among proteins of shared function covary, assembling specialized modules according to need. These variations in network structure arise via diverse mechanisms including differential protein expression, localization, and post-translational modification, and often link to specific phenotypes. Extensive proteome coverage has been essential for defining this reorganization since cell-specific interactions often reside outside core complexes. These direct observations of interactome reorganization complement reports of co-variation within protein complexes as inferred from constituent protein expression across cell lines, tissues, and individuals ( Luck et al., 2020 ; Ori et al., 2016 ; Romanov et al., 2019 ; Ryan et al., 2017 ).
