---
pmid: '14304855'
title: PURIFICATION, COMPOSITION, AND MOLECULAR WEIGHT OF THE BETA-GALACTOSIDASE OF
  ESCHERICHIA COLI K12.
authors:
- CRAVEN GR
- STEERS E Jr
- ANFINSEN CB
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1965'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC11572879
---

# PURIFICATION, COMPOSITION, AND MOLECULAR WEIGHT OF THE BETA-GALACTOSIDASE OF ESCHERICHIA COLI K12.
**Authors:** CRAVEN GR, STEERS E Jr, ANFINSEN CB
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1965)
**PMC:** [PMC11572879](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11572879/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1965 Jun;240:2468-77.

PURIFICATION, COMPOSITION, AND MOLECULAR WEIGHT OF THE BETA-GALACTOSIDASE OF 
ESCHERICHIA COLI K12.

CRAVEN GR, STEERS E Jr, ANFINSEN CB.

PMID: 14304855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Received 1983 Dec 13; Revised 1984 May 12; Accepted 1984 May 14.

An ultrastructural, histochemical, and biochemical study of the electric organ of the South American Torpedinid ray, Discopyge tschudii , was carried out.

Fine structural cytochemical localization of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) indicated that most of the esterase was associated with the basal lamina. Electron microscopy indicated no marked differences in the electrocyte ultrastructure between Discopyge and Torpedo californica.

Discopyge electric organ possessed three molecular forms, two asymmetric forms (16 S and 13 S) and one globular hydrophobic form (6.5 S). The asymmetric 16 S AChE form was solubilized by heparin, a sulfated glycosaminoglycan, suggesting that heparin-like macromolecules are involved in the binding of the enzyme to the basal lamina.

Our results show that cell-free translated AChE peptides, synthesized using Discopyge electric organ poly (A + ) RNA, correspond to a main band of 62,000 daltons which probably represents the catalytic subunit of the asymmetric AChE.

Key words: 16 S AChE, synaptic basal lamina, heparan sulfate proteoglycans, cell-free synthesis of AChE, electric organ, acetylcholinesterase, Discopyge tschudii

Articles from Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology are provided here courtesy of Springer
