---
pmid: '17000767'
title: Ribosomal protein S6 gene haploinsufficiency is associated with activation
  of a p53-dependent checkpoint during gastrulation.
authors:
- Panić L
- Tamarut S
- Sticker-Jantscheff M
- Barkić M
- Solter D
- Uzelac M
- Grabusić K
- Volarević S
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1636830
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00751-06
---

# Ribosomal protein S6 gene haploinsufficiency is associated with activation of a p53-dependent checkpoint during gastrulation.
**Authors:** Panić L, Tamarut S, Sticker-Jantscheff M, Barkić M, Solter D, Uzelac M, Grabusić K, Volarević S
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00751-06](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00751-06)
**PMC:** [PMC1636830](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1636830/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Dec;26(23):8880-91. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00751-06. Epub 2006
Sep  25.

Ribosomal protein S6 gene haploinsufficiency is associated with activation of a 
p53-dependent checkpoint during gastrulation.

Panić L(1), Tamarut S, Sticker-Jantscheff M, Barkić M, Solter D, Uzelac M, 
Grabusić K, Volarević S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Biotechnology, School of Medicine, 
University of Rijeka, Braće Branchetta 20, 51000, Rijeka, Croatia.

Nascent ribosome biogenesis is required during cell growth. To gain insight into 
the importance of this process during mouse oogenesis and embryonic development, 
we deleted one allele of the ribosomal protein S6 gene in growing oocytes and 
generated S6-heterozygous embryos. Oogenesis and embryonic development until 
embryonic day 5.5 (E5.5) were normal. However, inhibition of entry into M phase 
of the cell cycle and apoptosis became evident post-E5.5 and led to 
perigastrulation lethality. Genetic inactivation of p53 bypassed this checkpoint 
and prolonged development until E12.5, when the embryos died, showing decreased 
expression of D-type cyclins, diminished fetal liver erythropoiesis, and 
placental defects. Thus, a p53-dependent checkpoint is activated during 
gastrulation in response to ribosome insufficiency to prevent improper execution 
of the developmental program.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00751-06
PMCID: PMC1636830
PMID: 17000767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Nascent ribosome biogenesis is required during cell growth. To gain insight into the importance of this process during mouse oogenesis and embryonic development, we deleted one allele of the ribosomal protein S6 gene in growing oocytes and generated S6 -heterozygous embryos. Oogenesis and embryonic development until embryonic day 5.5 (E5.5) were normal. However, inhibition of entry into M phase of the cell cycle and apoptosis became evident post-E5.5 and led to perigastrulation lethality. Genetic inactivation of p53 bypassed this checkpoint and prolonged development until E12.5, when the embryos died, showing decreased expression of D-type cyclins, diminished fetal liver erythropoiesis, and placental defects. Thus, a p53-dependent checkpoint is activated during gastrulation in response to ribosome insufficiency to prevent improper execution of the developmental program.

DISCUSSION

The results presented in this study demonstrate that S6 gene haploinsufficiency triggers a p53-dependent checkpoint response during gastrulation probably to prevent defective cells from contributing to critical lineages later in development ( 13 ). It will be interesting to determine whether this response is the unique feature of the highly proliferating S6 wt / del cells in the gastrulating embryo and proliferating T cells or whether it is activated in other cell types as well ( 44 ). It has been suggested that nucleolar proteins p19Arf, L5, L11, and L23 are important regulators of p53 levels under stress conditions in vitro ( 3 , 6 , 7 , 15 , 18 , 27 , 30 , 34 , 45 , 51 , 54 ). It is tempting to speculate that, upon perturbations in ribosome biogenesis in S6 wt / del embryonic cells, these proteins participate in p53 activation. The fact that the genetic inactivation of p19Arf does not rescue the lethality of S6 -heterozygous embryos at gastrulation implies that it is not required for this checkpoint response ( 55 ). We are currently testing the effect of genetic inactivation of other candidate genes on the phenotype of S6 wt / del embryos at gastrulation in vivo. In support of the argument that p53 is being up-regulated due to the inhibition of ribosome biogenesis in S6 wt / del embryos rather than the ablation of a nonribosomal function of S6 are the observations that other mutations that block ribosome synthesis also trigger the p53 response ( 37 , 52 , 56 ). This issue will be further clarified by comparing the phenotypes of embryos that are heterozygous for other essential ribosomal protein genes with the phenotype of S6 wt / del embryos. Many p53 transcriptional targets have been identified as having impacts on the G 1 /S and the G 2 /M transitions ( p21 CIP1 , GADD45 , 14 - 3 - 3σ , Cdc25C , etc.) and apoptosis ( Puma , Bax , and Noxa ) ( 47 ). Since p21 CIP1 only partially accounts for the effect of p53 to the phenotype (Fig. 3H ), it will be necessary to determine the contribution of other candidate genes to the cell cycle block and apoptosis in S6 wt / del embryos.

A normal embryonic development of mice whose S6 phosphorylation sites were mutated suggests that a decrease in phospho-S6 does not trigger a checkpoint response ( 42 ).

What are the consequences of S6 heterozygosity on the embryonic development in the absence of p53? Since the translation of specific mRNAs depends on their affinity for ribosome, a defect in ribosome biogenesis in S6 wt / del embryos could change the accuracy of protein translation and alter the precise execution of the developmental program ( 26 ). Interestingly, despite a defect in ribosome biogenesis, E12.5 S6 wt / del / p53 − / − MEFs show normal expression of cyclin D1 and D3 proteins, proliferation rates, and sizes. How can these results explain the size difference between S6 wt / del / p53 − / − and S6 wt / wt / p53 − / − embryos? We found that the incorporation of BrdU in most tissues of E11.5 S6 wt / del / p53 − / − embryos was slightly decreased in comparison to their S6 wt / wt / p53 − / − counterparts, except for liver, which incorporated significantly less BrdU. A slight decrease in BrdU incorporation in S6 wt / del / p53 − / − relative to S6 wt / wt / p53 − / − embryos could at least partially account for the size discrepancies between S6 wt / del / p53 − / − and S6 wt / wt / p53 − / − embryos. Furthermore, we cannot formally rule out the possibility that a larger defect in proliferation exists in S6 wt / del / p53 − / − embryos during specific stages of the development. The fact that S6 wt / del / p53 − / − embryos develop as late as E12.5, when most of the tissues and organs are already formed, indicates that a serious deficiency in the amount of ribosomes in these embryos does not significantly affect the translation of the majority of mRNAs. Indeed, there was no effect on cyclin A, cyclin E, Cdk2, Cdk4, L11, and actin protein levels in these embryos. In contrast, the protein levels of cyclins D1 and D3 were decreased. The observation that the expression of cyclin D1 and D3 mRNAs was normal in S6 wt / del / p53 − / − embryos suggests a specific defect in their translation. The protein levels of D-type cyclins were more severely compromised within the S6 wt / del / p53 − / − fetal liver than in the remaining parts of the embryo. These results suggest that decreased levels of D-type cyclins are responsible for the proliferation defect in the mutant fetal liver. However, direct evidence in support of this notion is lacking.

As the progenitors from S6 wt / del / p53 − / − fetal livers are capable of differentiating along the erythroid lineage in culture, the possibility exists that impaired erythropoiesis in the mutant liver may be secondary to a defect in the other tissues. A feasible candidate tissue that is responsible for the fetal liver phenotype in the mutant embryo may be the placenta, as there are defects in this tissue and placenta has been suggested to influence definitive erythropoiesis in the fetal liver ( 16 ). Combining S6 wt / del / p53 − / − with tetraploid wild-type embryos should help in determining the role of S6 wt / del / p53 − / − placenta in the mutant fetal liver phenotype and/or the lethality of the embryos ( 31 ).

The fact that S6 wt / del / p53 − / − embryos die at an earlier developmental stage than embryos lacking all D-type cyclins suggests a defective translation of some other mRNAs. It will be challenging to identify them and determine how their translational defects contribute to the phenotype of these embryos. One could also imagine that an uncharacterized p53-independent checkpoint contributes to the phenotype S6 -heterozygous embryos. These are difficult issues that have to be addressed in the future.

The finding that a p53-dependent checkpoint prevents the development of S6 -heterozygous embryos during gastrulation, despite the fact that their protein translation is sufficient to allow their development (although aberrant) until E12.5, suggests that the molecular mechanisms have evolved during mammalian evolution; these mechanisms strongly guard against potential heterozygosity for the ribosomal protein S6 gene and possibly other ribosomal protein genes. Since some ribosomal protein genes are suggested to be tumor suppressors ( 1 , 9 , 50 ), we speculate that the failure to activate a p53-dependent checkpoint when an error in ribosome biogenesis or defective ribosomes are present could potentially lead to the development of malignant tumors ( 32 ). Additionally, the activation of this checkpoint might play an important role in development, senescence, and aging.
