---
pmid: '15121867'
title: TRAF family proteins link PKR with NF-kappa B activation.
authors:
- Gil J
- García MA
- Gomez-Puertas P
- Guerra S
- Rullas J
- Nakano H
- Alcamí J
- Esteban M
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC400457
doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.10.4502-4512.2004
---

# TRAF family proteins link PKR with NF-kappa B activation.
**Authors:** Gil J, García MA, Gomez-Puertas P, Guerra S, Rullas J, Nakano H, Alcamí J, Esteban M
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.24.10.4502-4512.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.10.4502-4512.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC400457](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC400457/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 May;24(10):4502-12. doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.10.4502-4512.2004.

TRAF family proteins link PKR with NF-kappa B activation.

Gil J(1), García MA, Gomez-Puertas P, Guerra S, Rullas J, Nakano H, Alcamí J, 
Esteban M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Centro Nacional de 
Biotecnología, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Campus 
Universidad Autónoma, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

The double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)-dependent protein kinase PKR activates NF-kappa 
B via the I kappa B kinase (IKK) complex, but little is known about additional 
molecules that may be involved in this pathway. Analysis of the PKR sequence 
enabled us to identify two putative TRAF-interacting motifs. The viability of 
such an interaction was further suggested by computer modeling. Here, we present 
evidence of the colocalization and physical interaction between PKR and TRAF 
family proteins in vivo, as shown by immunoprecipitation and confocal microscopy 
experiments. This interaction is induced upon PKR dimerization. Most 
importantly, we show that the binding between PKR and TRAFs is functionally 
relevant, as observed by the absence of NF-kappa B activity upon PKR expression 
in cells genetically deficient in TRAF2 and TRAF5 or after expression of TRAF 
dominant negative molecules. On the basis of sequence information and mutational 
and computer docking analyses, we favored a TRAF-PKR interaction model in which 
the C-terminal domain of TRAF binds to a predicted TRAF interaction motif 
present in the PKR kinase domain. Altogether, our data suggest that TRAF family 
proteins are key components located downstream of PKR that have an important 
role in mediating activation of NF-kappa B by the dsRNA-dependent protein 
kinase.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.10.4502-4512.2004
PMCID: PMC400457
PMID: 15121867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)-dependent protein kinase PKR activates NF-κB via the IκB kinase (IKK) complex, but little is known about additional molecules that may be involved in this pathway. Analysis of the PKR sequence enabled us to identify two putative TRAF-interacting motifs. The viability of such an interaction was further suggested by computer modeling. Here, we present evidence of the colocalization and physical interaction between PKR and TRAF family proteins in vivo, as shown by immunoprecipitation and confocal microscopy experiments. This interaction is induced upon PKR dimerization. Most importantly, we show that the binding between PKR and TRAFs is functionally relevant, as observed by the absence of NF-κB activity upon PKR expression in cells genetically deficient in TRAF2 and TRAF5 or after expression of TRAF dominant negative molecules. On the basis of sequence information and mutational and computer docking analyses, we favored a TRAF-PKR interaction model in which the C-terminal domain of TRAF binds to a predicted TRAF interaction motif present in the PKR kinase domain. Altogether, our data suggest that TRAF family proteins are key components located downstream of PKR that have an important role in mediating activation of NF-κB by the dsRNA-dependent protein kinase.

DISCUSSION

PKR activates NF-κB through the IKK signalosome in response to dsRNA and viruses ( 5 , 8 , 19 , 68 ). Although some models have been proposed, the precise molecular mechanism by which PKR activates IKK remains to be elucidated. TRAFs are adapter proteins mediating NF-κB activation in response to certain membrane receptors. We identified two possible TRAF-interacting motifs in PKR by sequence analysis; one is present in the dsRBD2 subdomain, and the other is found in its kinase domain. Molecular modeling confirmed that the PKR-TRAF interaction is structurally feasible, suggesting alternative docking positions for the two structural motifs. One of these arrangements implicates dsRBD2 in the same surface patch as used for dsRNA binding, suggesting a common recognition mechanism for PKR. The other situates the kinase domain in close contact with the TRAF trimer, allowing a more stable interaction and maintaining the possibility that the dsRBD domains are free to bind other molecules or protein domains. Therefore, we decided to further analyze a role for TRAFs in mediating PKR activation.

In this investigation, we found that PKR interacts and colocalizes with different TRAF family members (at least TRAF2, -5, and -6), as demonstrated by immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence studies. Binding studies with truncated mutant forms of TRAF served to map the interaction domain with PKR to the TRAF protein C terminus. In addition, mutant forms of PKR revealed that the PKR kinase domain is involved in the interaction with TRAF family proteins. These data are compatible with our previous report showing the requirement of PKR domains for recruitment of the IKK complex ( 20 ). These observations are also consistent with the predicted presence of a TRAF-interacting motif in the PKR kinase domain and fit with the model presented in Fig. 1D . TRAFs are modular proteins in which the TRAF domain interacts with upstream recruiter molecules, and their N-terminal domain is involved in interaction with and activation of downstream molecules. Thus, our data locate TRAFs downstream of PKR.

Initially, we used truncated TRAF proteins that act as dominant negative mutant proteins ( 52 ) to address the effect of TRAFs on PKR signaling. Thus, we showed that expression of dominant negative mutant TRAFs inhibited NF-κB activation triggered by PKR without affecting eIF2α phosphorylation, further suggesting a role for TRAF as a mediator of NF-κB activation located downstream of PKR. These observations were confirmed through the use of transient-expression systems and cells devoid of TRAF2 and TRAF5 expression.

It is also interesting that we observed the PKR-TRAF interaction upon IFN treatment. While the simplest explanation is that this is a result of increased PKR levels, it is tempting to suggest that an IFN-induced event contributes to the recruitment and binding of TRAFs to PKR. Further studies showed us that the recruitment of TRAFs to PKR is induced by pIC, or more generally by PKR dimerization (Fig. 5 ). Biochemical and structural analyses of TRAFs indicate their ability to self-associate. Therefore, TRAFs are particularly well suited to interact with and transduce signals from targets such as TNF receptors, which oligomerize in response to ligand binding ( 45 ). In addition to mediating signaling in response to extracellular receptors, TRAF proteins have also been linked to JNK activation induced by endoplasmic reticulum stress via IRE1 dimerization ( 61 ). It is noteworthy that it has also been shown that just clustering the N-terminal domain of TRAF family proteins is enough to begin downstream signaling events ( 25 ). This clustering is thought to promote activation of proximal components of IKK signaling that are bound to the N-terminal domain of TRAF family proteins. dsRNA is the main physiological activator of PKR; upon its binding, it induces first PKR dimerization and later a conformational change that renders the kinase susceptible to autophosphorylation and its full activation. Hence, activation of PKR can be seen as a consequence of elevated dsRNA levels, and PKR itself can act as a dsRNA receptor. dsRNA-induced dimerization and activation of PKR could thus lead to multimerization of TRAF family proteins. In this sense, activation of NF-κB by dsRNA can proceed by a pathway similar to that used by cells to respond to extracellular signals like TNF-α. In addition to triggering PKR-mediated NF-κB activation, dsRNA also induces NF-κB through extracellular binding to TLR-3 ( 2 , 30 ). Interestingly, PKR functions downstream of another TLR, TLR-4, and TIRAP is the adapter protein involved in this pathway ( 27 ). A complex containing TRAF6 has been located downstream of PKR in both the TLR-3 and TLR-4 pathways ( 27 , 30 ), thus further suggesting the relevance of the interaction between PKR and TRAFs.

In conclusion, our data provide evidence of the physical and functional interaction between PKR and TRAFs. In view of the data presented here and in previous reports, we can propose a model in which, upon dimerization, PKR would bind via its kinase domain to the TRAF protein C-terminal domain. This binding would be a requisite step for the recruitment and activation of the IKK complex by TRAFs, probably with the help of additional factors. This is the first report suggesting that TRAFs mediate NF-κB signaling as a result of an intracellular stimulus, dsRNA accumulation.
