---
pmid: '15161933'
title: Comprehensive proteomic analysis of interphase and mitotic 14-3-3-binding proteins.
authors:
- Meek SE
- Lane WS
- Piwnica-Worms H
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M403044200
---

# Comprehensive proteomic analysis of interphase and mitotic 14-3-3-binding proteins.
**Authors:** Meek SE, Lane WS, Piwnica-Worms H
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M403044200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M403044200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 30;279(31):32046-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M403044200. Epub 
2004 May 25.

Comprehensive proteomic analysis of interphase and mitotic 14-3-3-binding 
proteins.

Meek SE(1), Lane WS, Piwnica-Worms H.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 
02138, USA.

14-3-3 proteins regulate the cell division cycle and play a pivotal role in 
blocking cell cycle advancement after activation of the DNA replication and DNA 
damage checkpoints. Here we describe a global proteomics analysis to identify 
proteins that bind to 14-3-3s during interphase and mitosis. 14-3-3-binding 
proteins were purified from extracts of interphase and mitotic HeLa cells using 
specific peptide elution from 14-3-3 zeta affinity columns. Proteins that 
specifically bound and eluted from the affinity columns were identified by 
microcapillary high pressure liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry 
analysis. Several known and novel 14-3-3-interacting proteins were identified in 
this screen. Identified proteins are involved in cell cycle regulation, 
signaling, metabolism, protein synthesis, nucleic acid binding, chromatin 
structure, protein folding, proteolysis, nucleolar function, and nuclear 
transport as well as several other cellular processes. In some cases 14-3-3 
binding was cell cycle-dependent, whereas in other cases the binding was shown 
to be cell cycle-independent. This study adds to the growing list of human 
14-3-3-binding proteins and implicates a role for 14-3-3 proteins in a plethora 
of essential biological processes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M403044200
PMID: 15161933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
