---
pmid: '15967112'
title: WDRPUH, a novel WD-repeat-containing protein, is highly expressed in human
  hepatocellular carcinoma and involved in cell proliferation.
authors:
- Silva FP
- Hamamoto R
- Nakamura Y
- Furukawa Y
journal: Neoplasia
year: '2005'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1501145
doi: 10.1593/neo.04544
---

# WDRPUH, a novel WD-repeat-containing protein, is highly expressed in human hepatocellular carcinoma and involved in cell proliferation.
**Authors:** Silva FP, Hamamoto R, Nakamura Y, Furukawa Y
**Journal:** Neoplasia (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1593/neo.04544](https://doi.org/10.1593/neo.04544)
**PMC:** [PMC1501145](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1501145/)

## Abstract

1. Neoplasia. 2005 Apr;7(4):348-55. doi: 10.1593/neo.04544.

WDRPUH, a novel WD-repeat-containing protein, is highly expressed in human 
hepatocellular carcinoma and involved in cell proliferation.

Silva FP(1), Hamamoto R, Nakamura Y, Furukawa Y.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical 
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

In an attempt to disclose mechanisms of hepatocarcinogenesis and discover novel 
target molecules for the diagnosis and treatment of hepatocellular carcinomas 
(HCCs), we previously analyzed expression profiles of HCC tissues by means of 
human cDNA microarray. Among the genes upregulated in tumor tissues compared 
with their nontumor counterparts, we focused on a novel gene, termed WDRPUH, and 
characterized its biologic function. WDRPUH encodes a predicted 620-amino acid 
protein containing 11 highly conserved WD40-repeat domains. Multiple-tissue 
Northern blot analysis revealed its specific expression in the testis among 16 
normal tissues examined. Transfection of plasmids designed to express 
WDRPUH-specific siRNA significantly reduced its expression in HCC cells and 
resulted in growth suppression of transfected cells. Interestingly, we found 
that WDRPUH associated with HSP70, proteins of the chaperonin-containing TCP-1 
(CCT1) complex, as well as BRCA2. These findings have disclosed a novel insight 
into hepatocarcinogenesis and suggested that WDRPUH may be a molecular target 
for the development of new strategies to treat HCCs.

DOI: 10.1593/neo.04544
PMCID: PMC1501145
PMID: 15967112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In an attempt to disclose mechanisms of hepatocarcinogenesis and discover novel target molecules for the diagnosis and treatment of hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs), we previously analyzed expression profiles of HCC tissues by means of human cDNA microarray. Among the genes upregulated in tumor tissues compared with their nontumor counterparts, we focused on a novel gene, termed WDRPUH , and characterized its biologic function. WDRPUH encodes a predicted 620-amino acid protein containing 11 highly conserved WD40-repeat domains. Multiple-tissue Northern blot analysis revealed its specific expression in the testis among 16 normal tissues examined. Transfection of plasmids designed to express WDRPUH -specific siRNA significantly reduced its expression in HCC cells and resulted in growth suppression of transfected cells. Interestingly, we found that WDRPUH associated with HSP70, proteins of the chaperonin-containing TCP-1 (CCT1) complex, as well as BRCA2. These findings have disclosed a novel insight into hepatocarcinogenesis and suggested that WDRPUH may be a molecular target for the development of new strategies to treat HCCs.

Introduction

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common neoplasm in the world [ 1 ], and its incidence is gradually increasing in developed countries. It is the most common primary epithelial malignancy occurring in the liver. Although recent medical advances have made great progress in its diagnosis, many patients with HCC are not diagnosed until the disease has reached an advanced stage. A wide variety of chemotherapeutic agents as well as physical methods that cause obstruction of tumor nutrition vessels or induce necrosis of tumor cells with ethanol have been tried and are in use to treat HCCs, but no regimen has proved sufficiently to be curative and a substantial number of patients suffer from severe adverse effects [ 2 ]. Therefore, development of more effective chemotherapeutic drugs or chemoprevention strategies is an urgent issue.

A new class of anticancer drugs that target a specific molecule has proved its effectiveness in the clinical field. For example, imatinib, a small molecule that associates with the kinase domain of bcr-abl fusion protein, is now applied for chronic myelogenous leukemia and gastrointestinal stromal tumor that frequently harbors an activating mutation in the c-kit protein. Because these proteins play an essential role for their development, imatinib showed striking effectiveness against the growth of these neoplasms. Additionally, gefitinib, a drug that was developed to compete with the binding of ATP to the intracellular tyrosine kinase domain of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), was utilized for non-small cell lung carcinoma that expresses abundant EGFR [ 3 ]. Because EGFR mediates growth-promoting signals from the extracellular domain by the phosphorylation of downstream mediators, the inhibition of kinase activity results in a drastic growth-suppressive effect on a subset of lung cancers. These evidences strongly suggest that genes that are exclusively expressed in tumors and involved in their proliferation seem to be promising anticancer targets.

Epidemiologic studies have clarified that chronic liver inflammation caused by viral infection and exposures to chemical carcinogens are main risk factors for tumorigenesis. Accumulating evidence from molecular studies suggests that multiple processes involving qualitative and quantitative alterations in several gene products underlie hepatocarcinogenesis. Several growth factors including transforming growth factor-α (TGF-α) [ 4,5 ] and insulin-like growth factor-2 (IGF-2) have been implicated in the development of HCC. Altered expression of a number of other genes such as E-cadherin, MMP-1, MMP-7, MT1-MMP, gankyrin , and PEG10 may also be involved in the development and/or progression of HCC [ 6,7 ]. In addition, tumor-suppressor genes such as p53, AXIN1 , and p16 INK4a play a crucial role in hepatocarcinogenesis [ 8–10 ]. Regardless of all these findings, the complete understanding of the molecular events that lead to the development and progression of HCC is still far away.

In a previous study of genomewide analysis of gene expression in HCC by cDNA microarray [ 11 ], we identified 165 genes upregulated in HCC. Among the 165 transcripts in the list, we focused here on a gene encoding a novel WD-repeat protein. Proteins containing WD repeats have been reported to play crucial roles in a wide range of physiological functions including signal transduction, RNA processing [ 12 ], remodeling of cytoskeleton [ 13 ], regulation of vesicular trafficking [ 14 ], and cell division [ 15 ]. For example, RACK1 protein containing seven WD40-repeats functions as an anchor for protein kinase C (PKC) [ 16 ] in the PKC signal transduction pathway. Another WD domain-containing protein, TRIP-1, specifically associates with the type II TGF-β receptor in a kinase-dependent manner and mediates TGF-β signaling [ 17 ]. The WD-40 domain of Cdc4p binds directly to phospho-Sic1p and controls cell division by the recruitment of Skp1p [ 15,18 ]. Other WD-repeat-containing proteins have also been shown to be involved in a variety of functions [e.g., transcriptional regulation (TUPI), RNA processing (PRP4 and PRP17), cell cycle progression (CDC4 and CDC20), and growth regulation (G protein β-subunits and MSII)] [ 19 ].

In the present study, we identified a novel gene with growth-promoting activity, WDRPUH , which is overexpressed in a great majority of HCCs. Because suppression of WDRPUH leads to growth retardation of cancer cells, WDRPUH is a novel potential target for the development of therapeutic strategies for HCC.

Discussion

In the study presented here, we characterized a novel gene, WDRPUH , which was frequently upregulated in the majority of HCCs, and demonstrated its possible involvement in cancer proliferation. Moreover, we revealed that WDRPUH protein interacts with HSP70 and the CCT chaperonin complex proteins as well as the tumor-suppressor protein BRCA2.

WDRPUH encodes a putative 620-amino acid protein with 11 highly conserved WD40-repeat domains. Structural analysis has clarified that WD-repeat proteins form a propeller-like structure with several blades that is composed of a four-stranded antiparallel β-sheet. This β-propeller-like structure serves as a platform to which proteins can bind either stably or reversibly [ 22 ]. The number of blades in the β-propeller-like structure varies depending on the number of WD-repeats that are structural elements of the β-propeller. Therefore, WDRPUH should form a propeller-like structure with 11 blades responsible for its interaction with other proteins. Among other WD-repeat proteins, endonuclein containing five WD-repeat domains was also shown to be upregulated in pancreatic cancer [ 23 ]. Although immunohistochemical staining of endonuclein revealed that its subcellular localization was in the nucleus as well as in the endoplasmic reticulum, the functions of endonuclein have not yet been elucidated. Another WD-repeat protein, beta-transducin repeat-containing protein (BTRC), contains an F-box and seven WD-repeats, and functions as a component of SCF (SKIP1, CUL1, and F-protein) complex that degrades IkappaBalpha and β-catenin [ 24 ]. A recent report revealed that Btrc null mice showed hypoplasia of mammary glands, and that transgenic mice expressing human BTRC in mammary gland conversely displayed increased ductal branching, leading to the development of mammary tumors [ 25 ]. Similarly, accumulated WDRPUH may play a role in development of tumors through unidentified mechanism(s).

In normal tissues examined, WDRPUH is highly expressed in the testis, but not in other normal organs examined, which suggests that WDRPUH may be involved in spermatogenesis. Alternatively, WDRPUH may play a role of maintenance of progenitor properties of spermatocytes because cancers are thought to include some characteristics of progenitor cells [ 26 ]. These views may help future studies to reveal the physiological function of WDRPUH in the testis. In addition, because its expression is enhanced in HCC tissues, WDRPUH may be a novel cancer-testis antigen. Therefore, immunotherapies targeting WDRPUH may be a novel therapeutic option.

A number of proteins containing WD40-repeats bind to CCT complex. A proteomic analysis demonstrated that among the 21 CCT-interacting proteins in yeast cells, 16 proteins commonly possessed WD40 motifs [ 27 ]. CCT is a molecular chaperone with a double toroidal structure that contains a central cavity in which protein folding and the achievement of the correct conformation of newly translated proteins are assisted [ 28 ]. For example, Camasses et al. [ 29 ] have elegantly shown that the central cavity of CCT prevents nonnative interactions of the nascent WD-repeats of Cdc20, which in turn facilitates its native association with the WD-repeats. Because WDRPUH also interacts with CCT through its α and δ subunits, the functional structure of WDPURH protein and/or its stability may be achieved and maintained by CCT. It may be possible that CCT also exerts a different role from the maintenance of WDRPUH protein structure because it also regulates the activity of WD-repeat-containing proteins by controlling their liberation into the cytosol or binding to other proteins in assembly, such as with the Von Hippel-Lindal (VHL) protein elongin BC (VBC) tumor-suppressor complex formation [ 30 ]. The VHL-VBC complex was also shown to interact with both CCT and HSP70 on expression in mammalian cells [ 31 ]. Consistent with reports that CCT interacts with HSP70 either directly [ 28 ] or through interaction with the HSP70/HSP90 organizing protein [ 31 ], we further identified HSP70 as another WDRPUH-interacting protein but failed to detect association with HSP90 (data not shown). Because a CCT-HSP70 complex was shown to mediate the folding of some newly synthesized proteins [ 32,33 ], these chaperones may cooperate to stabilize the conformation of WDRPUH and keep the high level of WDRPUH in HCC cells. Future studies will be required to clarify the role of these chaperones in the function of WDRPUH.

Our experiments revealed an association of WDRPUH with BRCA2. BRCA2 plays an important role in DNA repair by direct binding through its BRC repeats to the DNA repair protein, RAD51 [ 34,35 ]. In addition, a protein complex of BRCA2 and BRAF35 was suggested to play a significant role in the regulation of cell cycle progression [ 36 ]. Disruption of associations of BRCA2 with BRCA2-binding partners could compromise the DNA repair functions of RADS1, or alter the functions of other binding partners [ 37 ]. Combining the facts that WDRPUH was transactivated in HCC cells and interacted with BRCA2, we hypothesize that elevated expression of WDRPUH may abrogate transcriptional modulation, DNA repair, or control of cell cycle progression through the interference of the binding between BRCA2 and its interacting proteins including RAD51, BRAF35, or others. Because WDRPUH is localized in the cytoplasm, its interaction to BRCA2 may impair the translocation of BRCA2 into the nucleus. Therefore, it is interesting to test whether growth promotion by WDRPUH in HCC cells depends on the interaction between WDRPUH and BRCA2.

In this report, we revealed that the expression of WDRPUH was enhanced in the majority of HCC tissues. Because it is very low or absent among all the vital organs and its elevated expression was associated with growth of HCC cells, suppression of WDRPUH may be an optional therapeutic strategy for treating primary HCCs. Because it is evidenced that WDRPUH interacts with HSP70 and CCT as well as BRCA2, the impairment of these interactions implicates a possible strategy to inhibit the function of WDRPUH. Although additional functional analyses of WDRPUH are required, the findings provided here should contribute to a novel insight in hepatocarcinogenesis and to the development of novel therapeutic approaches to HCC.
