---
pmid: '15339666'
title: Alternative splicing of Drosophila Dscam generates axon guidance receptors
  that exhibit isoform-specific homophilic binding.
authors:
- Wojtowicz WM
- Flanagan JJ
- Millard SS
- Zipursky SL
- Clemens JC
journal: Cell
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC2691713
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2004.08.021
---

# Alternative splicing of Drosophila Dscam generates axon guidance receptors that exhibit isoform-specific homophilic binding.
**Authors:** Wojtowicz WM, Flanagan JJ, Millard SS, Zipursky SL, Clemens JC
**Journal:** Cell (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2004.08.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2004.08.021)
**PMC:** [PMC2691713](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2691713/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2004 Sep 3;118(5):619-33. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2004.08.021.

Alternative splicing of Drosophila Dscam generates axon guidance receptors that 
exhibit isoform-specific homophilic binding.

Wojtowicz WM(1), Flanagan JJ, Millard SS, Zipursky SL, Clemens JC.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biological Chemistry, David 
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA 90095, USA.

Dscam is an immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily protein required for the formation 
of neuronal connections in Drosophila. Through alternative splicing, Dscam 
potentially gives rise to 19,008 different extracellular domains linked to one 
of two alternative transmembrane segments, resulting in 38,016 isoforms. All 
isoforms share the same domain structure but contain variable amino acid 
sequences within three Ig domains in the extracellular region. We demonstrate 
that different isoforms exhibit different binding specificity. Each isoform 
binds to itself but does not bind or binds poorly to other isoforms. The amino 
acid sequences of all three variable Ig domains determine binding specificity. 
Even closely related isoforms sharing nearly identical amino acid sequences 
exhibit isoform-specific binding. We propose that this preferential homophilic 
binding specificity regulates interactions between cells and contributes to the 
formation of complex patterns of neuronal connections.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2004.08.021
PMCID: PMC2691713
PMID: 15339666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

The specificity of neuronal connections is a hallmark of nervous systems from simple invertebrates to humans. On the basis of regeneration experiments in lower vertebrates, Sperry proposed that individual nerve “fibers…must carry some kind of individual identification tags presumably cytochemical in nature” that determine the pattern of connections formed ( Sperry, 1963 ). While molecules involved in cell recognition events in the developing brain have been described, it remains unknown whether a vast repertoire of molecular tags mediating interactions between cells exists. In principle, such molecules could function in multiple steps in the wiring process, including axon guidance, target recognition, and synapse formation.

In many regions of the nervous system, the demand for diverse molecular tags in controlling specificity may be modest. For example, a sequence of guidance steps regulated in a precise spatiotemporal fashion by a small number of signals acting at short and long range to attract or repel extending axons may be sufficient to guide growth cones to regions containing few potential targets ( Tessier-Lavigne and Goodman, 1996 ). In the target region, a relatively small number of cell surface determinants or combinations of them may be sufficient to distinguish between appropriate and inappropriate connections. Genetic experiments suggest that target specificity in the Drosophila neuromuscular system may be regulated in this manner ( Winberg et al., 1998 ).

In some regions of the developing nervous system, the levels of cell surface recognition proteins on different neurons determine wiring patterns. Gradients of cell surface proteins specify the targeting of millions of neurons to form topographic maps. In the vertebrate visual system, for instance, the graded expression of Eph receptors on growth cones and cell surface bound ephrins in the target tissue control the precise targeting of retinal ganglion cell growth cones to specific regions of the superior colliculus or the tectum ( Flanagan and Vanderhaeghen, 1998 ; McLaughlin et al., 2003a ). Recent studies indicate that both contact-dependent attraction and contact-dependent repulsion mediated by different levels of Eph receptors and ephrin ligands contribute to topographic map formation ( McLaughlin et al., 2003b ; Hansen et al., 2004 ).

It is not clear to what extent large families of cell surface proteins with different recognition properties contribute to specificity. In the mouse olfactory system, molecular diversity plays a crucial role in target specificity. Gain-of-function and loss-of-function studies indicate that odorant receptors, a large family of ∼1000 G protein coupled receptors, play an instructive role in regulating targeting of olfactory receptor neurons to specific glomeruli in the olfactory bulb ( Wang et al., 1998 ). How these receptors regulate this process is not known ( Feinstein and Mombaerts, 2004 ). Other large families of cell surface proteins have been proposed to regulate neuronal connectivity, including classical cadherins (20 in the mouse) ( Uemura, 1998 ), cadherin-related neuronal receptors (52 in the mouse) ( Kohmura et al., 1998 ; Wu and Maniatis, 1999 ), MHC class I proteins (20 in the mouse) ( Huh et al., 2000 ), and neurexins/neuroligins (∼1000 neurexin isoforms in vertebrates) ( Missler and Sudhof, 1998 ; Ullrich et al., 1995 ). Whether these families of proteins contribute to specific cellular recognition underlying connection specificity remains to be seen.

The discovery that the Drosophila Dscam locus potentially encodes 38,016 different protein isoforms ( Schmucker et al., 2000 ) raised the intriguing possibility that these isoforms function as molecular tags to regulate neuronal connectivity. Different isoforms are generated by alternative splicing and share the same domain structure with ten immunoglubulin (Ig) domains, six fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats, a single transmembrane domain, and a C-terminal cytoplasmic tail (see Figure 1 ). There are four variable domains encoded by blocks of alternative exons. These include the N-terminal halves of Ig2 (12 alternatives) and Ig3 (48 alternatives), all of Ig7 (33 alternatives), and two alternative transmembrane domains. Dscam regulates axon guidance and targeting in many regions of the nervous system ( Hummel et al., 2003 ; Wang et al., 2002 ). Recent studies have determined that neurons express many different Dscam isoforms, and different classes of neurons express biased sets of them ( Neves et al., 2004 ; Zhan et al., 2004 ). It remains unclear whether different Dscam isoforms have distinct biochemical properties that contribute to cellular recognition controlling specificity.

In this paper, we explore the biochemical properties of different Dscam isoforms. Through a series of binding assays, we demonstrate that each Dscam isoform tested binds to itself. We present data that demonstrates that this binding can promote interactions between cells in vivo. Dscam isoforms show surprising isoform-specific homophilic binding; each isoform binds to itself but poorly, if at all, to other isoforms tested. Based on the binding studies described here and in vivo studies ( Zhan et al., 2004 ), we speculate on the role of Dscam isoforms in regulating neuronal connectivity in the Drosophila brain.

Discussion

We previously reported that alternative splicing at the Drosophila Dscam locus potentially generates 38,016 Ig-containing cell surface proteins sharing the same domain structure. This includes 19,008 distinct extracellular domains linked to one of two alternative transmembrane segments. Here we demonstrate that a set of 11 different Dscam isoforms show surprising homophilic binding specificity. Each isoform preferentially binds to itself over different isoforms. Should this binding property extend to the entire spectrum of Dscam isoforms, this would provide enormous potential for regulating interactions between neurites during the establishment of neuronal connections.

Conclusion

Dscam plays a widespread role in regulating the formation of neuronal connections in Drosophila . Recent expression studies revealed that different neurons express different combinations of Dscam isoforms endowing each neuron with a discrete molecular identity. The biochemical studies described here demonstrate that different Dscam isoforms have striking differences in binding specificity. We propose that a general function of Dscam diversity is to promote repellent interactions between neurites from the same cell expressing the same array of Dscam isoforms in a cell-autonomous fashion. Differences in the arrays of isoforms expressed in different neurons may also contribute to the patterning of neuronal connections. Whether Dscam diversity is indeed crucial to patterning neuronal connections in flies awaits additional analyses in which the number and type of Dscam isoforms expressed in different neurons are systematically manipulated.
