---
pmid: '8272873'
title: Association and activation of Jak-Tyk kinases by CNTF-LIF-OSM-IL-6 beta receptor
  components.
authors:
- Stahl N
- Boulton TG
- Farruggella T
- Ip NY
- Davis S
- Witthuhn BA
- Quelle FW
- Silvennoinen O
- Barbieri G
- Pellegrini S
journal: Science
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.8272873
---

# Association and activation of Jak-Tyk kinases by CNTF-LIF-OSM-IL-6 beta receptor components.
**Authors:** Stahl N, Boulton TG, Farruggella T, Ip NY, Davis S, Witthuhn BA, Quelle FW, Silvennoinen O, Barbieri G, Pellegrini S
**Journal:** Science (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.8272873](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.8272873)

## Abstract

1. Science. 1994 Jan 7;263(5143):92-5. doi: 10.1126/science.8272873.

Association and activation of Jak-Tyk kinases by CNTF-LIF-OSM-IL-6 beta receptor 
components.

Stahl N(1), Boulton TG, Farruggella T, Ip NY, Davis S, Witthuhn BA, Quelle FW, 
Silvennoinen O, Barbieri G, Pellegrini S, et al.

Author information:
(1)Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Tarrytown, NY 10591.

A recently defined family of cytokines, consisting of ciliary neurotrophic 
factor (CNTF), leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), oncostatin M (OSM), and 
interleukin-6 (IL-6), utilize the Jak-Tyk family of cytoplasmic tyrosine 
kinases. The beta receptor components for this cytokine family, gp130 and LIF 
receptor beta, constitutively associate with Jak-Tyk kinases. Activation of 
these kinases occurs as a result of ligand-induced dimerization of the receptor 
beta components. Unlike other cytokine receptors studied to date, the receptors 
for the CNTF cytokine family utilize all known members of the Jak-Tyk family, 
but induce distinct patterns of Jak-Tyk phosphorylation in different cell lines.

DOI: 10.1126/science.8272873
PMID: 8272873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
