---
pmid: '11092819'
title: DNA damage-induced neural precursor cell apoptosis requires p53 and caspase
  9 but neither Bax nor caspase 3.
authors:
- D'Sa-Eipper C
- Leonard JR
- Putcha G
- Zheng TS
- Flavell RA
- Rakic P
- Kuida K
- Roth KA
journal: Development
year: '2001'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC11486231
doi: 10.1242/dev.128.1.137
---

# DNA damage-induced neural precursor cell apoptosis requires p53 and caspase 9 but neither Bax nor caspase 3.
**Authors:** D'Sa-Eipper C, Leonard JR, Putcha G, Zheng TS, Flavell RA, Rakic P, Kuida K, Roth KA
**Journal:** Development (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.128.1.137](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.128.1.137)
**PMC:** [PMC11486231](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11486231/)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2001 Jan;128(1):137-46. doi: 10.1242/dev.128.1.137.

DNA damage-induced neural precursor cell apoptosis requires p53 and caspase 9 
but neither Bax nor caspase 3.

D'Sa-Eipper C(1), Leonard JR, Putcha G, Zheng TS, Flavell RA, Rakic P, Kuida K, 
Roth KA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Neuropathology, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Programmed cell death (apoptosis) is critical for normal brain morphogenesis and 
may be triggered by neurotrophic factor deprivation or irreparable DNA damage. 
Members of the Bcl2 and caspase families regulate neuronal responsiveness to 
trophic factor withdrawal; however, their involvement in DNA damage-induced 
neuronal apoptosis is less clear. To define the molecular pathway regulating DNA 
damage-induced neural precursor cell apoptosis, we have examined the effects of 
drug and gamma-irradiation-induced DNA damage on telencephalic neural precursor 
cells derived from wild-type embryos and mice with targeted disruptions of 
apoptosis-associated genes. We found that DNA damage-induced neural precursor 
cell apoptosis, both in vitro and in vivo, was critically dependent on p53 and 
caspase 9, but neither Bax nor caspase 3 expression. Neural precursor cell 
apoptosis was also unaffected by targeted disruptions of Bclx and Bcl2, and 
unlike neurotrophic factor-deprivation-induced neuronal apoptosis, was not 
associated with a detectable loss of cytochrome c from mitochondria. The 
apoptotic pathway regulating DNA damage-induced neural precursor cell death is 
different from that required for normal brain morphogenesis, which involves both 
caspase 9 and caspase 3 but not p53, indicating that additional apoptotic 
stimuli regulate neural precursor cell numbers during telencephalic development.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.128.1.137
PMID: 11092819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Apoptosis is an essential physiological process accompanying the development of the central nervous system and human neurogenesis. However, the time scale and the underlying molecular mechanisms are yet poorly understood. Due to this fact, we investigated the functionality and general inducibility of apoptosis in the human neural ReNcell VM progenitor cell line during differentiation and also after exposure to staurosporine (STS) and ultraviolet B (UVB) irradiation. Transmission light microscopy, flow cytometry, and Western-/Immunoblot analysis were performed to compare proliferating and differentiating, in addition to STS- and UVB-treated cells. In particular, from 24 to 72 h post-initiation of differentiation, G0/G1 cell cycle arrest, increased loss of apoptotic cells, activation of pro-apoptotic BAX, Caspase-3, and cleavage of its substrate PARP were observed during cell differentiation and, to a higher extent, after treatment with STS and UVB. We conclude that redundant or defective cells are eliminated by apoptosis, while otherwise fully differentiated cells were less responsive to apoptosis induction by STS than proliferating cells, likely as a result of reduced APAF-1 expression, and increased levels of BCL-2. These data provide the evidence that apoptotic mechanisms in the neural ReNcell VM progenitor cell line are not only functional, but also inducible by external stimuli like growth factor withdrawal or treatment with STS and UVB, which marks this cell line as a suitable model to investigate apoptosis signaling pathways in respect to the differentiation processes of human neural progenitor cells in vitro.

Introduction

Apoptosis is critical in neurogenesis, where neural stem and progenitor cells develop into functionally specialized neural cell types such as neurons and glial cells. In almost all regions of the central and peripheral nervous system about half of the primarily developed neural cell population undergo apoptotic cell death during differentiation (Oppenheim 1991 ). Thus, redundant or dysfunctional cells are eliminated during neural network formation in brain development to ensure neural cellular integrity and functionality (Burek and Oppenheim 1999 ). These processes do not only occur during embryonic and fetal development, but are also present in the postnatal human brain, especially in neurogenic regions such as the lateral ventricles and the hippocampus (Biebl et al. 2000 ). Neurons which are not innervated by target cells die due to the lack of neurotrophic factors which ensure homeostasis of the neural tissue (Raff 1992 ). The fact that neurons emerge during embryogenesis, escape apoptosis, and persist in the human body lifelong, also indicates anti-apoptotic mechanisms in neural stem and progenitor cells. While developing neurons are competent to die by apoptosis unless they are rescued by extrinsic growth factors, mature neurons are protected by anti-apoptotic survival factors that prevent the activation of the execution phase of apoptosis (Benn and Woolf 2004 ). In both, developing and mature neurons programmed cell death is limited by subcellular location of members of the B-cell lymphoma 2 family, and presence and/or activity of anti-apoptotic brakes (Benn and Woolf 2004 ). Higher tolerance of mature neurons to apoptosis potentially occurs by up-regulating survival signaling, including protein kinase B (Akt) pathway (Cheung et al. 2009 ), tropomyosin receptor kinase A (TrkA) pathways (Culmsee et al. 2002 ), and nuclear factor-κappa B (NF-κB) signaling cascades (Zhang et al. 2015 ).

Both, pro- and anti-apoptotic signaling play a crucial role not only during early nervous system development, but also in the genesis of neurodegenerative disorders, for example Alzheimer´s and Parkinson´s diseases (Nijhawan et al. 2000 ).

Few studies have reported important regulatory functions of apoptosis signaling proteins during neurogenesis, but there are still open questions regarding the molecular mechanisms balancing cell death and survival in differentiating neural progenitor cells.

Instead of well-established animal models and primary human neural progenitor cells, we alternatively used the ReNcell VM cell line to characterize apoptosis signaling cascades during neural differentiation. The ReNcell VM progenitor cell line is a well-established human in vitro model system for studying the neural differentiation process with a broad similarity to primary neural progenitors as indicated by several studies (Hübner et al. 2010 ; Lange et al. 2011 ; Mazemondet et al. 2011 ; Lemcke and Kuznetsov 2013 ). The short doubling time, the easy and standardized handling of the sub-cultivation, together with the fast onset of differentiation in addition to the phenotype and genotype stability over long-term culture provide essential advantages of this cell line (Corteling and Miljan 2008 ).

Our study focused on how and to what extent human neural ReNcell VM progenitor cells are affected by apoptosis during growth factor withdrawal-induced differentiation compared to apoptosis induced by exposure to the broad spectrum kinase inhibitor staurosporine (STS) and ultraviolet B (UVB) radiation in vitro. All of these treatments implicate cellular stress response, leading to a rapid activation of the intrinsic mitochondrial apoptotic pathway (Fulda and Debatin 2006 ). Hence, pro-apoptotic BCL-2 family proteins such as BCL-2-associated X protein (BAX) and/or BCL-2 homologous antagonist killer (BAK) initiate alterations of the mitochondrial membrane potential as well as permeabilization of the mitochondrial outer membrane (MOMP) followed by the release of Cytochrome c and second mitochondria-derived activator of caspase (Smac)/direct IAP binding protein with low pI (DIABLO) from the mitochondria to the cytosol (Wei et al. 2001 ). Subsequently, formation of the apoptosome is initiated by the binding of Cytochrome c to apoptosis protease activating factor-1 (APAF-1). This leads to the activation of initiator Caspase-9 and later effector Caspase-3 and -7 resulting in apoptosis (Green 2005 ; Rehm et al. 2006 ). In contrast, pro-apoptotic signaling is antagonized by anti-apoptotic regulators of the BCL-2 protein family (e.g., B-cell lymphoma 2, BCL-2) and of the apoptotic suppressor protein family (e.g., X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis, XIAP) to ensure homeostatic cellular balance (Cheng et al. 2001 ; Letai et al. 2002 ; Kuwana et al. 2005 ). Inhibition of Caspase-3, -7, and -9 is prevented by binding of Smac to XIAP, which induces removal of the apoptosis blockade (Vaux and Silke 2003 ).

We tested whether apoptosis is functional and generally inducible in ReNcell VM progenitor cells which are capable to differentiate into neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes with physiological functionality within three days (Hoffrogge et al. 2006 ; Donato et al. 2007 ). Thus, proliferation, apoptosis, and expression of apoptotically relevant proteins were analyzed by microscopy, flow cytometry, and Western-/Immunoblotting at different time points after withdrawal of epidermal growth factor (EGF) and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) as well as after induction of apoptosis by exposure to STS and UVB radiation. Protein expression levels of pro- and anti-apoptotic key regulators of the intrinsic apoptosis signaling cascade were relatively quantified in proliferating and differentiating cells. We focused on BAX, Pro-Caspase-3, poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), BCL-2, Cytochrome c, APAF-1, Pro-Caspase-9, Smac, and XIAP. Furthermore, we analyzed whether the susceptibility to apoptosis induction by STS exposure varies between proliferating and fully differentiated cells.

Our results show significant expression changes of pro-apoptotic proteins and an increased loss of apoptotic ReNcell VM progenitor cells which are differentiation-dependent, and to a higher extent so, after exposure to STS and UVB. This indicates that apoptosis is functional and inducible in the ReNcell VM progenitor cell line. An increased expression level of BCL-2 as well as the lack of APAF-1 expression in fully differentiated cells are suggested to ensure survival of mature neurons and glial cells.

Discussion

Although it is known that apoptosis is present and highly conserved during neural development as well as in neural disorders, the molecular regulatory mechanisms are still poorly understood (Demir et al. 2009 ). Due to their human origin, the fast proliferation, and easy cultivation, ReNcell VM progenitor cell system is a suitable model to investigate neural development, differentiation, and pathologies (Corteling and Miljan 2008 ). The differentiation process of ReNcell VM cells was already described in principle by Donato et al. ( 2007 ). The immortalization of the cells by the v-myc oncogene provides a stable proliferation even over a high number of sub-cultivations without significant changes in the cell properties (Donato et al. 2007 ). After growth factor withdrawal, expression of v-myc is decreased and the cells stop proliferation and start to terminally differentiate (Balk et al. 1985 ; Donato et al. 2007 ; Gottlieb 2002 ; Villa et al. 2009 ), because the immortalization is based on the enhanced survival and proliferation ability in the presence of the mitogens EGF and bFGF (Balk et al. 1985 ; Conti et al. 2005 ; Pino-Barrio et al. 2015 ). The endogenous c-myc expression, which is relevant for processes during neurogenesis (Moon et al. 2004 ) is under very tight transcriptional and translational regulation to ensure that its protein amount is modulated according to the physiological needs of the cells (Lee and Reddy 1999 ). This means that after induction of differentiation by growth factor withdrawal, all observable effects can be attributed to native mechanisms controlled by endogenous c-myc, because under this condition v-myc is not expressed.

Our study focused on the functionality and inducibility of apoptosis signaling pathways, which were temporally and in detail characterized, both, in proliferating and differentiating ReNcell VM cells.
