---
pmid: '24485656'
title: Breast cancer proteins PALB2 and BRCA2 stimulate polymerase η in recombination-associated
  DNA synthesis at blocked replication forks.
authors:
- Buisson R
- Niraj J
- Pauty J
- Maity R
- Zhao W
- Coulombe Y
- Sung P
- Masson JY
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC4162405
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.01.009
---

# Breast cancer proteins PALB2 and BRCA2 stimulate polymerase η in recombination-associated DNA synthesis at blocked replication forks.
**Authors:** Buisson R, Niraj J, Pauty J, Maity R, Zhao W, Coulombe Y, Sung P, Masson JY
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2014.01.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2014.01.009)
**PMC:** [PMC4162405](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4162405/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Rep. 2014 Feb 13;6(3):553-64. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.01.009. Epub
2014  Jan 30.

Breast cancer proteins PALB2 and BRCA2 stimulate polymerase η in 
recombination-associated DNA synthesis at blocked replication forks.

Buisson R(1), Niraj J(1), Pauty J(1), Maity R(1), Zhao W(2), Coulombe Y(1), Sung 
P(2), Masson JY(3).

Author information:
(1)Genome Stability Laboratory, CHU de Québec Research Center, HDQ Pavilion, 
Oncology Axis, 9 McMahon, Québec City, QC G1R 2J6, Canada; Department of 
Molecular Biology, Medical Biochemistry and Pathology, Laval University, Québec 
City, QC G1V 0A6, Canada.
(2)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520-8024, USA.
(3)Genome Stability Laboratory, CHU de Québec Research Center, HDQ Pavilion, 
Oncology Axis, 9 McMahon, Québec City, QC G1R 2J6, Canada; Department of 
Molecular Biology, Medical Biochemistry and Pathology, Laval University, Québec 
City, QC G1V 0A6, Canada. Electronic address: jean-yves.masson@fmed.ulaval.ca.

One envisioned function of homologous recombination (HR) is to find a template 
for DNA synthesis from the resected 3'-OH molecules that occur during 
double-strand break (DSB) repair at collapsed replication forks. However, the 
interplay between DNA synthesis and HR remains poorly understood in higher 
eukaryotic cells. Here, we reveal functions for the breast cancer proteins BRCA2 
and PALB2 at blocked replication forks and show a role for these proteins in 
stimulating polymerase η (Polη) to initiate DNA synthesis. PALB2, BRCA2, and 
Polη colocalize at stalled or collapsed replication forks after hydroxyurea 
treatment. Moreover, PALB2 and BRCA2 interact with Polη and are required to 
sustain the recruitment of Polη at blocked replication forks. PALB2 and BRCA2 
stimulate Polη-dependent DNA synthesis on D loop substrates. We conclude that 
PALB2 and BRCA2, in addition to their functions in D loop formation, play 
crucial roles in the initiation of recombination-associated DNA synthesis by 
Polη-mediated DNA repair.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.01.009
PMCID: PMC4162405
PMID: 24485656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

Faithful DNA replication is essential to prevent accumulation of mutations and to maintain genome integrity. Replication forks are vulnerable to unrepaired DNA damage or secondary structures, which can lead to fork stalling or collapse. A stalled replication fork can be arrested but still has the ability to restart. In contrast, a collapsed replication fork leads the generation of replication-dependent DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs), triggering the recruitment of DSB repair machineries. Tumor suppressor proteins PALB2 (Partner and localizer of BRCA2) and BRCA2 (breast cancer type 2 susceptibility protein) are essential for active homologous recombination (HR) repair, the main mechanism of error-free homology-directed repair of DNA DSBs in mammalian cells ( Xia et al., 2006 ). The central activity of HR is performed by RAD51 using resected DNA DSBs to invade a homologous double-strand DNA to form a displacement loop (D-loop). Defects in HR cause genomic instability and promote accumulation of cancer-promoting mutations. PALB2 and BRCA2 mutations have been associated with predisposition to breast and pancreatic cancer ( Roy et al., 2012 ), and PALB2- or BRCA2-deficient cells are sensitive to PARP inhibitors ( Bryant et al., 2005 ; Buisson et al., 2010 ). Furthermore, PALB2 (FANCN) and BRCA2 (FANCD1) are mutated in a subgroup of Fanconi Anemia ( Howlett et al., 2002 ; Xia et al., 2007 ) an inherited genomic instability disorder caused by mutations in genes regulating replication-dependent removal of interstrand DNA crosslinks ( Moldovan and D'Andrea, 2009 ).

PALB2 links BRCA1 and BRCA2 to promote efficient DNA repair by HR ( Sy et al., 2009a ; Xia et al., 2006 ; Zhang et al., 2009a ; Zhang et al., 2009b ). In the absence of PALB2, the recruitment of BRCA2 and RAD51 to DSBs is defective ( Xia et al., 2007 ; Xia et al., 2006 ). PALB2 interacts with BRCA1 via its N-terminal coiled-coil domain ( Buisson and Masson, 2012 ; Sy et al., 2009b ; Zhang et al., 2009a ; Zhang et al., 2009b ) and with BRCA2 via its WD40 domain (in C-terminal) ( Xia et al., 2007 ). The coiled-coil domain is also important for the self-interaction of PALB2. In the presence of DNA damage, PALB2 dissociates and interacts with BRCA1 to allow PALB2 localization and HR activation ( Buisson and Masson, 2012 ). A third domain, named ChAM (Chromatin-Association Motif), is located at the center of the protein (395 to 446 amino acid) and is required for PALB2 chromatin localization ( Bleuyard et al., 2012 ). Recently, we have shown that purified PALB2 binds D-loops preferentially and interacts directly with RAD51 to stimulate strand invasion ( Buisson et al., 2010 ; Dray et al., 2010 ). At the same time, the Kowalczykowski, Heyer, and West laboratories reported the purification of full length BRCA2. Human BRCA2 promotes RAD51 filament assembly on single-strand DNA, which stimulates RAD51-mediated DNA strand exchange ( Jensen et al., 2010 ; Liu et al., 2010 ; Thorslund et al., 2010 ).

Following D-loop formation by RAD51, the 3′tail single-stranded DNA is used as a primer for extension by polymerases. The polymerases δ, η, υ, ε, ζ, κ and REV1 have all been shown to be involved in HR although their exact functions remain unclear. Currently, only polymerases δ, η, and κ are known to extend a D-loop structure after RAD51 single-strand DNA invasion ( Li et al., 2013 ; McIlwraith et al., 2005 ; Sebesta et al., 2011 ; Sebesta et al., 2013 ; Sneeden et al., 2013 ). In yeast, genetic evidence has shown clearly that polymerase δ is important for HR and gene conversion ( Holmes and Haber, 1999 ; Maloisel et al., 2008 ) but these results have not yet been confirmed in human cells. Moreover, it has been recently shown that the subunit p12 of Polδ is degraded in S-phase by the CRL4 cdt2 complex after replicative-associated DNA damage ( Terai et al., 2013 ; Zhang et al., 2013 ). These results suggest that, in human cells, polymerase δ could not be essential for stalled and collapsed replication forks repair. However, further investigations will be necessary to better understand the regulation of Polδ after DNA damage and the biological significance of this observation. In DT40 cells, Polη-deficient cells showed a significant decrease in the frequency of both Ig gene conversion and HR-dependent repair of I-SceI- induced DSBs when compared to wild-type cells ( Kawamoto et al., 2005 ). Interestingly, in human cells, overexpression of Polη and κ leads to an increase in HR frequency ( Sebesta et al., 2013 ) while absence of Polη slightly decreases HR ( Moldovan et al., 2010 ). Deletion of both Pol η and κ leads to a 50% decrease in HR frequency ( Sebesta et al., 2013 ) suggesting a cooperation mechanism between these polymerases.

We hypothesized that different polymerases could be involved in recombination-associated DNA synthesis. In this study, we focused on Polη in order to better define its function in HR. Polη has been shown to co-localize and interact with RAD51 ( Kannouche et al., 2001 ; McIlwraith et al., 2005 ), and several studies have shown that, contrary to Polδ and κ, Polη activity for D-loop extension does not require the loading of PCNA and RFC ( Li et al., 2013 ; McIlwraith et al., 2005 ; Sebesta et al., 2011 ; Sebesta et al., 2013 ; Sneeden et al., 2013 ). These results suggest that polη activity could be regulated by other factors.

In humans, the deletion of Polη leads to Xeroderma pigmentosum variant (XPV), which is associated with an increase risk of skin cancer induced by UV radiation ( Johnson et al., 1999 ; Masutani et al., 1999 ). Polη is a member of the Y-family DNA polymerases (with Polι, Polκ and REV1) that specialize in performing DNA damage bypass repairs involving TT-cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer (CPD) ( Masutani et al., 1999 ), 8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG) ( Haracska et al., 2000b ) or O 6 -methylguanine (me 6 G) ( Haracska et al., 2000a ). These DNA lesions can cause collapsed replication forks, impeding lesion bypass by replicative DNA polymerases (Polε and Polδ). Although the biological role of Polη in UV-induced DNA damage repair is well understood, very little is known about the regulation of Polη activity during HR repair.

In this study, we show that Polη interacts directly with PALB2 and BRCA2 at DSBs induced by collapsed replication forks. We show that PALB2 and BRCA2 are important for (i) Polη localization to collapsed replication forks, and (ii) Polη-dependent DNA synthesis for D-loop extension. Our results establish PALB2 and BRCA2 as key regulators of the extension step after strand invasion at replication-dependent DSBs.

Discussion

Replicative DNA polymerases are often stalled by DNA lesions, and the replication blockage is released by translesion DNA synthesis and HR. How these processes are intertwined is poorly understood in higher eukaryotic cells. Our data reveal novel roles for BRCA2 and PALB2 in coordinating the DNA synthesis step of HR during the repair of replication forks.

Conclusion

Previous studies on BRCA2 and PALB2 clearly established these proteins as essential regulators of HR through RAD51 regulation. Our findings show that PALB2 and BRCA2 are important both for polymerase η localization and DNA polymerization activity, leading us to propose a new mechanistic function for these HR mediator proteins. The effect of the PALB2 Q775X mutant on DNA synthesis was revealing, as this mutation is associated with breast cancer ( Foulkes et al., 2007 ). The deleterious effect of this mutation might be related to the inability to interact with both Polη and BRCA2. As a result, PALB2-deficient cells undergo genome rearrangement and instability as DSBs are not properly repaired. Altogether, our results suggest that the defects observed in BRCA2- and PALB2-deficient or mutated cells, are related not only to RAD51-dependent strand invasion, but also to a deficiency in DNA synthesis.
