---
pmid: '7537214'
title: A major role for the protein tyrosine kinase JAK1 in the JAK/STAT signal transduction
  pathway in response to interleukin-6.
authors:
- Guschin D
- Rogers N
- Briscoe J
- Witthuhn B
- Watling D
- Horn F
- Pellegrini S
- Yasukawa K
- Heinrich P
- Stark GR
journal: EMBO J
year: '1995'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC398228
doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb07128.x
---

# A major role for the protein tyrosine kinase JAK1 in the JAK/STAT signal transduction pathway in response to interleukin-6.
**Authors:** Guschin D, Rogers N, Briscoe J, Witthuhn B, Watling D, Horn F, Pellegrini S, Yasukawa K, Heinrich P, Stark GR
**Journal:** EMBO J (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb07128.x](https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb07128.x)
**PMC:** [PMC398228](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC398228/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1995 Apr 3;14(7):1421-9. doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb07128.x.

A major role for the protein tyrosine kinase JAK1 in the JAK/STAT signal 
transduction pathway in response to interleukin-6.

Guschin D(1), Rogers N, Briscoe J, Witthuhn B, Watling D, Horn F, Pellegrini S, 
Yasukawa K, Heinrich P, Stark GR, et al.

Author information:
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.

The protein tyrosine kinases JAK1, JAK2 and Tyk2 and STATs (signal transducers 
and activators of transcription) 1 and 3 are activated in response to 
interleukin-6 (IL-6) in human fibrosarcoma cells. In mutant cells lacking JAK1, 
JAK2 or Tyk2, the absence of one kinase does not prevent activation of the 
others; activation does not, therefore, involve a sequential three-kinase 
cascade. In the absence of JAK1, the phosphorylation of the gp130 subunit of the 
IL-6 receptor and the activation of STATs 1 and 3 are greatly reduced. JAK1 is 
also necessary for the induction of IRF1 mRNA, thus establishing a requirement 
for the JAK/STAT pathway in the IL-6 response. JAK2 and Tyk2 although activated 
cannot, in the absence of JAK1, efficiently mediate activation of STATs 1 and 3. 
A kinase-negative mutant of JAK2 can, however, inhibit such activation, and 
ancillary roles for JAK2 and Tyk2 are not excluded. A major role for JAK1 and 
the nonequivalence of JAK1 and JAK2 in the IL-6 response pathway are, 
nevertheless, clearly established for these cells.

DOI: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb07128.x
PMCID: PMC398228
PMID: 7537214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The protein tyrosine kinases JAK1, JAK2 and Tyk2 and STATs (signal transducers and activators of transcription) 1 and 3 are activated in response to interleukin-6 (IL-6) in human fibrosarcoma cells. In mutant cells lacking JAK1, JAK2 or Tyk2, the absence of one kinase does not prevent activation of the others; activation does not, therefore, involve a sequential three-kinase cascade. In the absence of JAK1, the phosphorylation of the gp130 subunit of the IL-6 receptor and the activation of STATs 1 and 3 are greatly reduced. JAK1 is also necessary for the induction of IRF1 mRNA, thus establishing a requirement for the JAK/STAT pathway in the IL-6 response. JAK2 and Tyk2 although activated cannot, in the absence of JAK1, efficiently mediate activation of STATs 1 and 3. A kinase-negative mutant of JAK2 can, however, inhibit such activation, and ancillary roles for JAK2 and Tyk2 are not excluded. A major role for JAK1 and the nonequivalence of JAK1 and JAK2 in the IL-6 response pathway are, nevertheless, clearly established for these cells.
