---
pmid: '25653356'
title: 'Linking cell surface receptors to microtubules: tubulin folding cofactor D
  mediates Dscam functions during neuronal morphogenesis.'
authors:
- Okumura M
- Sakuma C
- Miura M
- Chihara T
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6705359
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0973-14.2015
---

# Linking cell surface receptors to microtubules: tubulin folding cofactor D mediates Dscam functions during neuronal morphogenesis.
**Authors:** Okumura M, Sakuma C, Miura M, Chihara T
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0973-14.2015](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0973-14.2015)
**PMC:** [PMC6705359](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6705359/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2015 Feb 4;35(5):1979-90. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0973-14.2015.

Linking cell surface receptors to microtubules: tubulin folding cofactor D 
mediates Dscam functions during neuronal morphogenesis.

Okumura M(1), Sakuma C(1), Miura M(2), Chihara T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan, and.
(2)Department of Genetics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan, and Core Research for Evolutional 
Science and Technology, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Tokyo, 102-0076, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Genetics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan, and Core Research for Evolutional 
Science and Technology, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Tokyo, 102-0076, 
Japan tchihara@mol.f.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

Formation of functional neural networks requires the coordination of cell 
surface receptors and downstream signaling cascades, which eventually leads to 
dynamic remodeling of the cytoskeleton. Although a number of guidance receptors 
affecting actin cytoskeleton remodeling have been identified, it is relatively 
unknown how microtubule dynamics are regulated by guidance receptors. We used 
Drosophila olfactory projection neurons to study the molecular mechanisms of 
neuronal morphogenesis. Dendrites of each projection neuron target a single 
glomerulus of ∼50 glomeruli in the antennal lobe, and the axons show 
stereotypical pattern of terminal arborization. In the course of genetic 
analysis of the dachsous mutant allele (ds(UAO71)), we identified a mutation in 
the tubulin folding cofactor D gene (TBCD) as a background mutation. TBCD is one 
of five tubulin-folding cofactors required for the formation of α- and β-tubulin 
heterodimers. Single-cell clones of projection neurons homozygous for the TBCD 
mutation displayed disruption of microtubules, resulting in ectopic arborization 
of dendrites, and axon degeneration. Interestingly, overexpression of TBCD also 
resulted in microtubule disruption and ectopic dendrite arborization, suggesting 
that an optimum level of TBCD is crucial for in vivo neuronal morphogenesis. We 
further found that TBCD physically interacts with the intracellular domain of 
Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule (Dscam), which is important for neural 
development and has been implicated in Down syndrome. Genetic analyses revealed 
that TBCD cooperates with Dscam in vivo. Our study may offer new insights into 
the molecular mechanism underlying the altered neural networks in cognitive 
disabilities of Down syndrome.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/351979-12$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0973-14.2015
PMCID: PMC6705359
PMID: 25653356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.

## Full Text

Abstract

Formation of functional neural networks requires the coordination of cell surface receptors and downstream signaling cascades, which eventually leads to dynamic remodeling of the cytoskeleton. Although a number of guidance receptors affecting actin cytoskeleton remodeling have been identified, it is relatively unknown how microtubule dynamics are regulated by guidance receptors. We used Drosophila olfactory projection neurons to study the molecular mechanisms of neuronal morphogenesis. Dendrites of each projection neuron target a single glomerulus of ∼50 glomeruli in the antennal lobe, and the axons show stereotypical pattern of terminal arborization. In the course of genetic analysis of the dachsous mutant allele ( ds UAO71 ), we identified a mutation in the tubulin folding cofactor D gene ( TBCD ) as a background mutation. TBCD is one of five tubulin-folding cofactors required for the formation of α- and β-tubulin heterodimers. Single-cell clones of projection neurons homozygous for the TBCD mutation displayed disruption of microtubules, resulting in ectopic arborization of dendrites, and axon degeneration. Interestingly, overexpression of TBCD also resulted in microtubule disruption and ectopic dendrite arborization, suggesting that an optimum level of TBCD is crucial for in vivo neuronal morphogenesis. We further found that TBCD physically interacts with the intracellular domain of Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule (Dscam), which is important for neural development and has been implicated in Down syndrome. Genetic analyses revealed that TBCD cooperates with Dscam in vivo . Our study may offer new insights into the molecular mechanism underlying the altered neural networks in cognitive disabilities of Down syndrome.

Introduction

During development, axons and dendrites elongate toward the proper target region under the guidance of cell surface receptors. The activation of cell surface receptors leads to the modification of cytoskeleton that promotes changes in neuronal morphology. Previous studies have identified a series of actin-binding proteins regulating axon guidance downstream of guidance receptors ( Dent et al., 2011 ). For example, Enabled, the barbed-end binding protein, acts downstream of the repulsive guidance receptor Roundabout ( Bashaw et al., 2000 ). However, it is still unclear how cell surface receptors and downstream signaling cascades converge to effect the remodeling of cytoskeleton, especially microtubule dynamics.

Microtubules are polymers assembled using heterodimers of α- and β-tubulins. Five tubulin-folding cofactors A–E (TBCA–TBCE) assist in the formation of tubulin heterodimers ( Tian et al., 1996 ). The roles of tubulin-folding cofactors have been studied mainly in vitro ; however, recent studies have reported TBCB and TBCE as regulators of neural development and function. Mutations in TBCE cause the hyperparathyroidism-retardation-dysmorphism syndrome in humans, and progressive motor neuropathy in mice ( Martin et al., 2002 ; Parvari et al., 2002 ). Drosophila TBCE is required for the development and function of neuromuscular synapses ( Jin et al., 2009 ), and TBCB knockdown enhances axon growth of neuronal cell lines ( Lopez-Fanarraga et al., 2007 ). However, it is unclear whether tubulin-folding cofactors regulate neuronal morphogenesis by participating in specific cell surface receptor pathways.

We used the Drosophila olfactory system to analyze neuronal morphology. In the antennal lobe, each olfactory projection neuron (PN) targets its dendrites to one of ∼50 glomeruli, and makes synaptic connections with axons of a specific class of olfactory receptor neuron (ORN) ( Jefferis and Hummel, 2006 ; Sakuma et al., 2014 ). Axons of PNs innervate the calyx of the mushroom body, and have a stereotypical pattern of terminal arborization in the lateral horn ( Marin et al., 2002 ; Wong et al., 2002 ). The target glomeruli of PN dendrites are specified by PN lineages, birth order, and the intrinsic activity of transcription factors ( Jefferis et al., 2001 ; Komiyama et al., 2003 ; Komiyama and Luo, 2007 ; Tea et al., 2010 ). Cell-surface receptors have been identified as regulators of PN axon and dendrite morphogenesis ( Zhu and Luo, 2004 ; Zhu et al., 2006 ; Komiyama et al., 2007 ; Hong et al., 2009 ; Sweeney et al., 2011 ; Sekine et al., 2013 ). Thus, PNs provide us with a suitable model for analyzing axon and dendrite morphology in vivo .

During the analysis of the dachsous mutant allele ( ds UAO71 ), we identified a mutation in the tubulin folding cofactor D ( TBCD ) locus as a background mutation. TBCD is required for dendrite morphogenesis and axon maintenance in PNs, along with other tubulin-folding cofactors involved in neuronal morphogenesis. Microtubule networks were disrupted in TBCD mutant PNs. We further found that TBCD interacts with the intracellular domain of Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule (Dscam), which is important for neural development ( Hattori et al., 2008 ). Genetic assays revealed that TBCD cooperates with Dscam during neuronal morphogenesis. Together, we propose that Dscam might modulate microtubule dynamics largely through TBCD function.

Discussion

In this study, we have analyzed the function of TBCD in neuronal morphogenesis using PNs and mushroom body neurons. TBCD and other tubulin-folding cofactors are required for in vivo dendrite morphogenesis. We have also revealed the physical interactions between TBCD and Dscam, and shown that TBCD cooperates with Dscam in dendrite morphogenesis in PNs and axon segregation in mushroom body neurons.

The roles of tubulin-folding cofactors have been mainly studied in vitro , but recently TBCB and TBCE have been shown to be regulators of neural development and function ( Lopez-Fanarraga et al., 2007 ; Schaefer et al., 2007 ; Jin et al., 2009 ). Our study provides in vivo evidence that tubulin-folding cofactors are required for neuronal morphogenesis. An increase or a decrease in the amount of TBCD caused ectopic arborization of dendrites in PNs. Mutation of TBCD in PNs also led to the destruction of microtubules and axon degeneration. Our results suggest that microtubule networks mediated by tubulin-folding cofactors are important for suppression of ectopic dendrite arborization, and for axon maintenance. In addition to the role of a tubulin chaperone, TBCD is also used for recruitment of the γ-tubulin ring complex at centrosomes, a microtubule-organizing center in HeLa cells ( Cunningham and Kahn, 2008 ). Depletion of TBCD in the centrosomes might affect neuronal morphology. Further studies on the precise subcellular localization of TBCD in neurons would provide a better understanding of TBCD functions in neuronal morphogenesis.

TBCE knockdown in PNs led to the ectopic arborization of dendrites, but not to axon degeneration. This result may have been due to knockdown efficiency of TBCE that was insufficient to reveal the true phenotype regarding axon degeneration. Another possibility is that the axon degeneration resulting from TBCE knockdown may occur in older flies, as TBCE mutation causes progressive motor neuropathy, which results in axon degeneration 4–5 weeks after birth ( Schmalbruch et al., 1991 ).

We have also identified Dscam as an interacting partner of TBCD. It is likely that TBCD functions downstream of Dscam and propagates signals from Dscam to effect changes in microtubule dynamics. Dscam has multiple functions in neural development, acting as a homophilic repulsive molecule and also an attractive receptor stimulated by Netrin ( Hattori et al., 2008 ; Ly et al., 2008 ). Although Dscam has been studied extensively, the pathways acting downstream of Dscam are not well known. One known pathway is the Dock/Pak signaling. Drosophila Dscam was initially identified as a Dock-binding protein ( Schmucker et al., 2000 ). DSH3PX, one of the sorting nexins, connects Dscam to the actin cytoskeleton by interacting with Dock, Dscam, and Wasp. Wasp is a component of the actin polymerization machinery ( Worby et al., 2001 ). The intracellular domain of Dscam is not well conserved, but the mammalian homolog of Dscam (DSCAM) binds and activates p21-Activated Kinase 1 (PAK1; Li and Guan, 2004 ). Therefore, the downstream signal is likely to be evolutionarily conserved. Interestingly, PAK1 phosphorylates human TBCB, and knockdown of TBCB or PAK1 reduces microtubule polymerization, suggesting that the phosphorylation of TBCB by PAK1 might be necessary for the function of TBCB ( Vadlamudi et al., 2005 ). Therefore, in mammals, the tubulin-folding pathway may work downstream of DSCAM by interacting with PAK1. However, in Drosophila PNs, Dock and Pak are not considered necessary for dendrite targeting and axon guidance ( Sekine et al., 2013 ). TBCD is likely to act downstream of Dscam independently from the Dock/Pak pathway in dendrite morphogenesis of PNs.

Regulation of microtubule dynamics has been well studied and many MAPs have been identified. Recent studies have suggested that cell surface receptors and their downstream signaling cascades also regulate microtubule dynamics. For example, the microtubule plus-end tracking protein orbit/MAST acts downstream of Abl in Slit repellent pathways during axon guidance ( Lee et al., 2004 ). Netrin receptor DCC directly binds β-tubulin and modulates microtubule dynamics ( Qu et al., 2013 ). Our study shows that TBCD binds Dscam and is required for dendrite morphogenesis in PNs and axon segregation in mushroom body neurons. We also found that Dscam overexpression reduced α-tubulin level at the site where Dscam was localized, at the periphery of S2 cells and the Dscam spots along the axons of primary cultured neurons. Moreover, Dscam overexpression caused ectopic dendrite arborization in PNs and loss of α and β lobes in mushroom body neurons, which could be suppressed by reduction of TBCD. Based on these results, we propose that TBCD accumulates locally where Dscam is localized, which leads to the destruction of tubulin heterodimers. As mentioned in the previous paragraph, Dscam interacts with Dock, DSH3PX1, and Wasp ( Worby et al., 2001 ). Therefore, we could not exclude the possibility that Dscam affects actin filaments via Dock/Pak signaling pathway, which changes the localization of microtubules. It is important to understand how Dscam and downstream signaling such as Dock/Pak and tubulin-folding cofactors coordinate the dynamics of actin filaments and microtubules. We also examined whether the reduction of Dscam affects microtubules by expressing myc-tagged βTub56D in Dscam P1 PNs. However, we could not observe any obvious changes in the localization and amount of βTub56D-myc. As the formation and maintenance of microtubule seem to be spatiotemporally regulated by many guidance receptors including Dscam, it could not be possible to detect the defects of microtubules only with Dscam knockdown. Further study is needed to investigate how Dscam regulates TBCD functions, and how Dscam mediates its effects on microtubule dynamics via TBCD.

The human ortholog of Dscam , DSCAM , is located in the Down syndrome critical region, and is implicated in the cognitive disabilities of Down syndrome ( Yamakawa et al., 1998 ; Korbel et al., 2009 ). The expression level of Dscam is regulated by Fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP), which is an RNA binding protein that suppresses the expression of target genes ( Cvetkovska et al., 2013 ; Kim et al., 2013 ). Silencing of the Fragile X mental retardation 1 gene encoding FMRP results in Fragile X syndrome. Both Down syndrome and Fragile X syndrome are causes for intellectual disability. We have shown that the gain-of-function phenotype of Dscam was suppressed by knockdown of TBCD . Therefore, TBCD may contribute to structural and/or functional alteration of neural circuits in Down syndrome or Fragile X syndrome.
