---
pmid: '23838831'
title: Decreased in vitro mitochondrial function is associated with enhanced brain
  metabolism, blood flow, and memory in Surf1-deficient mice.
authors:
- Lin AL
- Pulliam DA
- Deepa SS
- Halloran JJ
- Hussong SA
- Burbank RR
- Bresnen A
- Liu Y
- Podlutskaya N
- Soundararajan A
- Muir E
- Duong TQ
- Bokov AF
- Viscomi C
- Zeviani M
- Richardson AG
- Van Remmen H
- Fox PT
- Galvan V
journal: J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC3790931
doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2013.116
---

# Decreased in vitro mitochondrial function is associated with enhanced brain metabolism, blood flow, and memory in Surf1-deficient mice.
**Authors:** Lin AL, Pulliam DA, Deepa SS, Halloran JJ, Hussong SA, Burbank RR, Bresnen A, Liu Y, Podlutskaya N, Soundararajan A, Muir E, Duong TQ, Bokov AF, Viscomi C, Zeviani M, Richardson AG, Van Remmen H, Fox PT, Galvan V
**Journal:** J Cereb Blood Flow Metab (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jcbfm.2013.116](https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2013.116)
**PMC:** [PMC3790931](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3790931/)

## Abstract

1. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2013 Oct;33(10):1605-11. doi:
10.1038/jcbfm.2013.116.  Epub 2013 Jul 10.

Decreased in vitro mitochondrial function is associated with enhanced brain 
metabolism, blood flow, and memory in Surf1-deficient mice.

Lin AL(1), Pulliam DA, Deepa SS, Halloran JJ, Hussong SA, Burbank RR, Bresnen A, 
Liu Y, Podlutskaya N, Soundararajan A, Muir E, Duong TQ, Bokov AF, Viscomi C, 
Zeviani M, Richardson AG, Van Remmen H, Fox PT, Galvan V.

Author information:
(1)1] Research Imaging Institute, University of Texas Health Science Center at 
San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, USA [2] Barshop Institute for Longevity and 
Aging Studies, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San 
Antonio, Texas, USA [3] Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, 
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, 
USA.

Recent studies have challenged the prevailing view that reduced mitochondrial 
function and increased oxidative stress are correlated with reduced longevity. 
Mice carrying a homozygous knockout (KO) of the Surf1 gene showed a significant 
decrease in mitochondrial electron transport chain Complex IV activity, yet 
displayed increased lifespan and reduced brain damage after excitotoxic insults. 
In the present study, we examined brain metabolism, brain hemodynamics, and 
memory of Surf1 KO mice using in vitro measures of mitochondrial function, in 
vivo neuroimaging, and behavioral testing. We show that decreased respiration 
and increased generation of hydrogen peroxide in isolated Surf1 KO brain 
mitochondria are associated with increased brain glucose metabolism, cerebral 
blood flow, and lactate levels, and with enhanced memory in Surf1 KO mice. These 
metabolic and functional changes in Surf1 KO brains were accompanied by higher 
levels of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha, and by increases in the activated 
form of cyclic AMP response element-binding factor, which is integral to memory 
formation. These findings suggest that Surf1 deficiency-induced metabolic 
alterations may have positive effects on brain function. Exploring the 
relationship between mitochondrial activity, oxidative stress, and brain 
function will enhance our understanding of cognitive aging and of age-related 
neurologic disorders.

DOI: 10.1038/jcbfm.2013.116
PMCID: PMC3790931
PMID: 23838831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Recent studies have challenged the prevailing view that reduced mitochondrial function and increased oxidative stress are correlated with reduced longevity. Mice carrying a homozygous knockout (KO) of the Surf1 gene showed a significant decrease in mitochondrial electron transport chain Complex IV activity, yet displayed increased lifespan and reduced brain damage after excitotoxic insults. In the present study, we examined brain metabolism, brain hemodynamics, and memory of Surf1 KO mice using in vitro measures of mitochondrial function, in vivo neuroimaging, and behavioral testing. We show that decreased respiration and increased generation of hydrogen peroxide in isolated Surf1 KO brain mitochondria are associated with increased brain glucose metabolism, cerebral blood flow, and lactate levels, and with enhanced memory in Surf1 KO mice. These metabolic and functional changes in Surf1 KO brains were accompanied by higher levels of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha, and by increases in the activated form of cyclic AMP response element-binding factor, which is integral to memory formation. These findings suggest that Surf1 deficiency-induced metabolic alterations may have positive effects on brain function. Exploring the relationship between mitochondrial activity, oxidative stress, and brain function will enhance our understanding of cognitive aging and of age-related neurologic disorders.

Introduction

For the past four decades, reduced mitochondrial function has been regarded as one of the major factors promoting aging and age-related neurodegenerative disorders. 1 Mitochondrial dysfunction causes decreased energy (ATP) production, reduced oxygen consumption rate, and increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation. Reactive oxygen species are thought to cause oxidative stress, damage cellular structure, and ultimately lead to widespread cellular dysfunction and death. Preserved mitochondrial integrity, therefore, is generally presumed to be necessary for increased longevity as well as preserved brain functionality during aging.

Surprisingly, recent studies have suggested that decreased mitochondrial respiration and increased ROS generation are associated with extended lifespan in various organisms. 2 , 3 , 4 , 5

The extension of lifespan in C. elegans by mitochondrial mutations has been shown to be dependent on hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1 signaling. 3 Hypoxia-inducible factor are highly conserved transcription factors that are stabilized when oxygen decreases in the cellular environment, 6 or when the electron transport chain is inhibited. 3 Increased HIF-1 activates genes to promote survival during hypoxia. In C. elegans , HIF-1 is activated by elevated ROS production and is associated with increased longevity. 3 Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 forms a transcriptional complex with and can activate cAMP response element-binding (CREB) protein, 7 which has a key role in long-term memory and learning. 8 Thus, reduced mitochondrial respiration may extend lifespan and concomitantly enhance memory.

In mammals, a correlation between reduced mitochondrial function and extended longevity was recently observed in mice in which the Surf1 gene contained a premature STOP mutation (Surf1 KO; Surf1 −/− ). Surf1 participates in the efficient assembly and function of cytochrome C oxidase (COX; mitochondrial Complex IV), which is the terminal enzyme of the electron transport chain and is critical for ATP synthesis. In spite of showing reduced COX levels and activity (to 25% to 50% of control), median lifespan of Surf1 KO mice was increased by 21% compared with control mice. 9 Moreover, brains of Surf1 KO mice were shown to be remarkably resistant to excitotoxic insults. 9 These observations suggest that Surf1 deficiency may have a positive impact on brain functionality as resistance to toxicity is expected to be associated with improved tissue function. This hypothesis, as well as indices of brain integrity and function such as metabolism and hemodynamics in Surf1 KO mice, remained largely unexplored. The purpose of this study was to determine the relationship between among brain mitochondrial function, brain metabolism, cerebral blood flow (CBF), and memory in young adult Surf1 KO mice.

Discussion

Our data show that long-lived 9 Surf1 KO mice have significantly enhanced CMR Glc , increased CBF, increased brain lactate, and increased levels of HIF-1 α and pCREB, as well as enhanced working and recognition memory. ATP production in brain mitochondria isolated from Surf1 KO mice remained unchanged despite a 49% reduction in COX activity, a 24% reduction in state 3 respiration, and a 24% increase in H 2 O 2 production. ATP levels were also unchanged in Surf1-deficient brains.

In agreement with prior studies, 9 blood lactate in Surf1 KO mice was higher than in WT mice, indicating a partial block in the aerobic metabolism of pyruvate in peripheral tissues. 9 Alterations in peripheral glucose metabolism may lead to changes in blood glucose levels, which could in turn alter the rates of transport and metabolism of 18 F-FDG. Blood glucose levels in Surf1 KO mice, however, were not changed under fed conditions (in our studies) nor after short-term or long-term fasting in the studies of Deepa et al , 24 ruling out this potential confound in the semiquantitative assessment of CMR Glc .

The increase in CMR Glc in Surf1 KO brains indicates a moderate increase in brain glucose utilization. Lactate levels were also moderately increased in Surf1-deficient brains. Maintained ATP levels, however, argue against a significant block in respiration rates in Surf1 KO brains because of excess capacity of COX in vivo . 27 , 28 Moreover, because blood lactate is increased in Surf1 KO animals, it is possible that elevated brain lactate levels result from concentration-driven transport of lactate from blood. Additional studies including direct measurements of in vivo respiration rates are needed to determine the precise interactions between different metabolic pathways in Surf1-deficient brains.

Even though we cannot infer changes in H 2 O 2 levels in vivo from the observed in vitro increases in H 2 O 2 production in mitochondria isolated from Surf1 KO brains, it is possible that even mild increases in H 2 O 2 in brains from Surf1-deficient mice may lead to the stabilization of HIF-1 α . 3 , 26 HIF-1 α , in turn, can stabilize and activate its coactivator CREB, 7 which is critically involved in the processes believed to underlie the formation of long-term memory. 8 In agreement with the observed increases in brain HIF-1 α , we found that activated CREB was increased and recognition memory was enhanced in Surf1 KO mice. The increases in CBF in brain regions related to memory (i.e., cortex and hippocampus) could thus be driven by increased CMR Glc associated with enhanced functional activation. Hence, increased HIF-1 α signaling may influence processes of memory formation in Surf1 KO mice.

The findings of this study are consistent with prior evidence from invertebrate models, suggesting that decreased mitochondrial respiration and increased ROS generation could have beneficial effects. 3 , 4 Although it is well documented that exceedingly increased ROS can damage cellular structure/function and thus accelerate aging and shorten lifespan, 1 emerging evidence shows that mild increases in ROS (such as those arising from partial inhibition of mitochondrial respiration) may cause opposite effects, including increases in lifespan and protection against age-related disease. 3 , 4 , 29 Mild increases of ROS formation in mitochondria may cause an adaptive response (dubbed ‘mitohormesis' Ristow and Zarsek 29 and Schulz et al 30 ) that leads to increased stress resistance, believed to ultimately cause a long-term reduction in oxidative stress. 29

Taken together, our data indicate that Surf1-induced mitochondrial dysfunction could lead to physiologic adaptations that ultimately result in enhanced neuroprotection 9 and enhanced cognitive function. In agreement with this hypothesis, mice in which Coq7, a mitochondrial hydroxylase necessary for the synthesis of ubiquinone, is reduced by half (Mclk1 +/− mice) have enhanced resistance to neurologic damage. 31 Mitochondrial dysfunction arising from Surf1 deficiency, however, may not be beneficial in all tissue systems. Despite enhanced brain functionality, we observed impairments associated with swimming in Surf1 KO mice. This deficiency was severe enough to preclude some behavioral tests such as the Morris water maze, which require unencumbered swimming.

Another limitation of the present study is that we used isoflurane to anesthetize the animals during functional imaging experiments. This intervention may have lowered brain metabolism; and thus our measurements may not be representative of brain metabolism in the conscious state. 32 In addition, isoflurane anesthesia may, itself, disturb the tissue's metabolic profile, such as by increasing lactate, as compared with propofol anesthesia. 33 To minimize these potential confounds, we used low concentrations of isoflurane for anesthesia and monitored respiration rates and rectal temperatures continuously for all experimental groups during functional imaging experiments. Although we cannot rule out a potential effect of isoflurane in our results, at the dose used, isoflurane anesthesia did not affect basic physiologic parameters for animals of either genotype while measurements were taken. Furthermore, and supporting the notion that our in vivo measurements of brain lactate concentration in WT and Surf1 KO mice were not grossly affected by isoflurane anesthesia, blood lactate levels in conscious Surf1 KO animals were consistent with and showed the same direction of change as brain lactate levels measured in vivo . Thus, it is unlikely that the differences in brain lactate levels between WT and Surf1 KO measured with in vivo brain imaging are due to differential effects of isoflurane anesthesia in Surf1 KO and WT mice.

In conclusion, the present studies show that reduced oxygen consumption and increased H 2 O 2 generation without changes in ATP production by Surf1-deficient brain mitochondria in vitro are associated with maintained brain ATP levels, increased glucose metabolism, increased CBF, and enhanced working and recognition memory in vivo in Surf1 KO mice. Future studies assessing the relationship between in vivo mitochondrial function, ROS generation, and brain functionality will have important implications for our understanding of cognitive aging and age-related neurologic disorders.
