---
pmid: '21240188'
title: Interaction between the helicases genetically linked to Fanconi anemia group
  J and Bloom's syndrome.
authors:
- Suhasini AN
- Rawtani NA
- Wu Y
- Sommers JA
- Sharma S
- Mosedale G
- North PS
- Cantor SB
- Hickson ID
- Brosh RM Jr
journal: EMBO J
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC3041957
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.362
---

# Interaction between the helicases genetically linked to Fanconi anemia group J and Bloom's syndrome.
**Authors:** Suhasini AN, Rawtani NA, Wu Y, Sommers JA, Sharma S, Mosedale G, North PS, Cantor SB, Hickson ID, Brosh RM Jr
**Journal:** EMBO J (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2010.362](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2010.362)
**PMC:** [PMC3041957](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3041957/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2011 Feb 16;30(4):692-705. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.362. Epub 2011 Jan 
14.

Interaction between the helicases genetically linked to Fanconi anemia group J 
and Bloom's syndrome.

Suhasini AN(1), Rawtani NA, Wu Y, Sommers JA, Sharma S, Mosedale G, North PS, 
Cantor SB, Hickson ID, Brosh RM Jr.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, National Institute on Aging, NIH, NIH 
Biomedical Research Center, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Mar;12(3):138-9. doi: 10.1038/nrm3067.

Bloom's syndrome (BS) and Fanconi anemia (FA) are autosomal recessive disorders 
characterized by cancer and chromosomal instability. BS and FA group J arise 
from mutations in the BLM and FANCJ genes, respectively, which encode DNA 
helicases. In this work, FANCJ and BLM were found to interact physically and 
functionally in human cells and co-localize to nuclear foci in response to 
replication stress. The cellular level of BLM is strongly dependent upon FANCJ, 
and BLM is degraded by a proteasome-mediated pathway when FANCJ is depleted. 
FANCJ-deficient cells display increased sister chromatid exchange and 
sensitivity to replication stress. Expression of a FANCJ C-terminal fragment 
that interacts with BLM exerted a dominant negative effect on hydroxyurea 
resistance by interfering with the FANCJ-BLM interaction. FANCJ and BLM 
synergistically unwound a DNA duplex substrate with sugar phosphate backbone 
discontinuity, but not an 'undamaged' duplex. Collectively, the results suggest 
that FANCJ catalytic activity and its effect on BLM protein stability contribute 
to preservation of genomic stability and a normal response to replication 
stress.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2010.362
PMCID: PMC3041957
PMID: 21240188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Bloom's syndrome (BS) and Fanconi anemia (FA) are autosomal recessive disorders characterized by cancer and chromosomal instability. BS and FA group J arise from mutations in the BLM and FANCJ genes, respectively, which encode DNA helicases. In this work, FANCJ and BLM were found to interact physically and functionally in human cells and co-localize to nuclear foci in response to replication stress. The cellular level of BLM is strongly dependent upon FANCJ, and BLM is degraded by a proteasome-mediated pathway when FANCJ is depleted. FANCJ-deficient cells display increased sister chromatid exchange and sensitivity to replication stress. Expression of a FANCJ C-terminal fragment that interacts with BLM exerted a dominant negative effect on hydroxyurea resistance by interfering with the FANCJ–BLM interaction. FANCJ and BLM synergistically unwound a DNA duplex substrate with sugar phosphate backbone discontinuity, but not an ‘undamaged' duplex. Collectively, the results suggest that FANCJ catalytic activity and its effect on BLM protein stability contribute to preservation of genomic stability and a normal response to replication stress.

Introduction

Fanconi anemia (FA) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by multiple congenital anomalies, progressive bone marrow failure, and high cancer risk ( Levitus et al, 2006 ; Taniguchi and D'Andrea, 2006 ; Wang, 2007 ). Cells from FA patients exhibit spontaneous chromosomal instability and hypersensitivity to DNA interstrand cross-linking agents. Thirteen causative genes (FANCA/B/C/D1/D2/E/F/G/I/J/L/M/N) have been identified to date. Increasing evidence suggests that these genes encode proteins that function as signal transducers ( Andreassen et al, 2004 ; Pichierri and Rosselli, 2004 ; Matsuoka et al, 2007 ; Wang et al, 2007 ) and/or DNA processing molecules ( Cantor et al, 2001 ; Meetei et al, 2005 ; Gari et al, 2008 ) in a DNA-damage response pathway. The FA proteins interact with a variety of DNA repair factors, and it is becoming increasingly evident that these interactions are critical for a robust DNA-damage response. For example, the Bloom's syndrome (BS) helicase (BLM) is associated with the FA core complex ( Meetei et al, 2003 ) and BLM mutations lead to a disease characterized by severe growth retardation, immunodeficiency, reduced fertility, and predisposition to cancer ( Hanada and Hickson, 2007 ). In recent work, FANCM was shown to act as a bridging protein to connect the BLM complex and FA core complex through independent domains that mediate physical interactions with RMI1/TopoIIIα and FANCF, respectively ( Deans and West, 2009 ). At the cellular level, the hallmark of BS is a high rate of sister chromatid exchange (SCE) ( Chaganti et al, 1974 ; Ray and German, 1984 ). An emerging theme is that BLM and its associated factors collaborate with FA proteins to deal with replication stress and maintain chromosomal stability. Moreover, recent evidence suggests that the FA pathway and BLM collaborate during mitosis to prevent micronucleation and chromosome abnormalities such as those at fragile sites where sister chromatid bridging can occur ( Chan et al, 2009 ; Naim and Rosselli, 2009 ).

One of the more recently identified FA proteins, shown to be defective in the FA complementation group J, is the B RCA1- a ssociated C -terminal h elicase (BACH1/BRIP; designated here as FANCJ) ( Levitus et al, 2005 ; Levran et al, 2005 ; Litman et al, 2005 ). FANCJ was also identified as a protein associated with breast cancer ( Cantor et al, 2001 ; Seal et al, 2006 ). FANCJ-deficient cells are sensitive to DNA cross-linking agents ( Litman et al, 2005 ; Peng et al, 2007 ), and FANCJ-depleted cells exhibit mitomycin C (MMC)-induced chromosomal breakage accompanied by triradial and quadriradial chromosome formation ( Bridge et al, 2005 ; Litman et al, 2005 ). Like the human counterpart, chicken brip1 (FANCJ) cells are also characterized by chromosomal instability, including an elevated level of SCE ( Bridge et al, 2005 ) that is not seen in most human FA cells. FANCJ has been proposed to function downstream of FANCD2 monoubiquitination ( Litman et al, 2005 ), a critical event in the FA pathway. Evidence supports a role for FANCJ in a homologous recombination (HR) pathway of double-strand break repair. However, FANCJ is also required for timely progression through S phase ( Kumaraswamy and Shiekhattar, 2007 ), and can unwind G-quadruplex structures to maintain genomic stability ( London et al, 2008 ; Wu et al, 2008 ), suggesting that FANCJ has additional roles in response to replication stress that may operate independently of the classic FA pathway ( Wu et al, 2009 ; Hiom, 2010 ).

Since there is only limited information on the role of FA proteins in the proper DNA-damage response, investigation of protein interactions between endogenous FANCJ and other DNA repair factors is likely to lead to new insights into the molecular pathogenesis of FA and the role of the FANCJ helicase in reacting to replication stress and participating in HR repair. Given the evidence that both BLM and FANCJ operate to maintain genomic stability in downstream events of HR repair, we investigated the potential interaction of the two helicases. Our studies demonstrate that FANCJ and BLM are associated with each other in vivo , and that the two helicases physically and functionally interact with each other. These results are discussed in light of the cross-talk between the FA pathway and the BLM protein complex to prevent chromosomal instability associated with cancer and human disease.

Discussion

In this study, we report that the FANCJ and BLM helicases can be reciprocally co-immunoprecipitated from human NEs, and that their association is not dependent on the integrity of the FA core complex, FANCD2, or BRCA1. We observed that the FANCJ–BLM interaction is enriched when cells are exposed to HU or DNA damaging agents and the helicases co-localize in nuclear foci after HU, suggesting that they operate together in a pathway responsible for helping cells cope with replication stress. Indeed, we show that FANCJ-deficient cells, like BLM-deficient cells, are sensitive to the replication inhibitor HU and show elevated SCE. FANCJ status profoundly influences cellular BLM protein levels, suggesting their direct physical interaction in vivo . In support of this, biochemical interaction assays with purified recombinant proteins demonstrated that BLM and FANCJ helicases directly bind to each other in a manner that is not dependent on DNA. Thus, BLM and FANCJ interact with each other in vitro and in vivo .

One of the most striking observations from our studies is that BLM protein levels are significantly reduced in FANCJ null cells or in cells that are acutely depleted of FANCJ using RNA interference. Although the BLM protein level was markedly reduced in FANCJ-deficient cells, the levels of interacting partners of BLM (RPA, FEN-1, TopoIIIα) were not reduced, suggesting that the absence or reduction of intracellular FANCJ protein concentration exerted an effect specifically on BLM. Presumably, the physical interaction between BLM and FANCJ helps to stabilize the BLM protein in vivo ; however, the converse is not true, that is, the FANCJ protein level was not different in BLM mutant and corrected cells. The observed decline in BLM protein level in FANCJ-deficient cells suggests that cellular phenotypes associated with FANCJ deficiency may at least partly reflect an underlying reduction in BLM protein abundance. Interestingly, BLM protein was also reduced in FA-A or FA-D2 cell lines. BLM protein levels are known to be affected when certain interacting partners (e.g., RMI1 ( Yin et al, 2005 ) and RMI2 ( Xu et al, 2008 )) are deficient, suggesting that BLM folding or susceptibility to proteasome degradation is highly influenced by interacting/associated proteins in the FA or related pathways. Both BS cells ( Pichierri et al, 2004 ) and FA-J cells are hypersensitive to DNA cross-linking agents ( Litman et al, 2005 ; Peng et al, 2007 ). A hallmark of BS is elevated SCE ( Hanada and Hickson, 2007 ), also detected in chicken brip1 cells ( Bridge et al, 2005 ) and, as shown here, in FANCJ-deficient human cells. Although the ∼2-fold SCE increase in FA-J cells was not as great as the 7- to 10-fold increase observed in cells from BS patients ( Chaganti et al, 1974 ; German, 1993 ), it is comparable to that observed following depletion of BLM ( Yin et al, 2005 ) or FANCM ( Deans and West, 2009 ). In human cells, FANCJ knockdown by RNA interference resulted in elevated MMC-induced chromosomal abnormalities including breakage, chromatid interchanges, triradials, and quadriradials ( Bridge et al, 2005 ; Litman et al, 2005 ), a chromosomal structure typically observed in BS patients ( van Brabant et al, 2000 ). Hence, the chromosomal instability associated with FANCJ deficiency may at least partly reflect impaired BLM function in FA-J null cells.

The fact that DNA damage-induced FANCD2 monoubiquitination is intact in FANCJ-deficient cells ( Litman et al, 2005 ) suggests that FANCJ helicase functions downstream in the FA pathway. Similarly, BLM is not required for FANCD2 monoubiquitination or focus formation ( Pichierri et al, 2004 ), suggesting a downstream role as well. The FA core complex is required for BLM phosphorylation following treatment with a DNA cross-linker but not HU ( Pichierri et al, 2004 ), implicating the FA core complex as an upstream regulator of BLM function by setting the stage for homologous recombinational repair at blocked replication forks. Moreover, Hirano et al (2005) reported that MMC-induced formation of GFP-BLM foci was dramatically reduced in both human and chicken fancc or fancd2 cells. A functional linkage between FANCC and BLM was proposed since the level of SCE in chicken blm cells was similar to that of fancc/blm cells ( Hirano et al, 2005 ). Cross-talk between BLM and proteins of the FA pathway is supported by experimental evidence that the FA core protein complex and the BLM complex associate together in a supercomplex known as BRAFT (BLM, RPA, FA, and TopoIIIα) ( Meetei et al, 2003 ). Although FANCJ was not identified by mass spec analysis of BLM-interacting proteins from unstressed cells, it is possible that the interaction of FANCJ with BLM is transient and less stable than that of the BRAFT complex or that FANCJ and BLM exist in a protein complex that is regulated following cellular stress and is distinct from the BRAFT complex. In subsequent work, Singh et al (2008) identified FANCM in complexes containing BLM and RMI2, a novel factor required for the stability of the BLM complex and also important for chromosomal stability ( Singh et al, 2008 ; Xu et al, 2008 ). Our results demonstrate that BLM interacts with FANCJ in addition to the FA core complex. Since BLM, but not TopoIIIα, is depleted in FANCJ-deficient cells, it is possible that FANCJ regulates a very specific subset of BLM reactions (e.g. fork regression) not requiring the topoisomerase.

BLM co-localizes with FANCJ (this study) and FANCD2 ( Pichierri et al, 2004 ) in response to cellular exposure to HU or MMC. Therefore, it is likely that BLM, FANCJ, and monoubiquintylated FANCD2 preferentially associate with each other at stalled or blocked replication forks. The single-stranded DNA-binding protein RPA, which interacts physically and functionally with both BLM and FANCJ, strongly co-localizes with FANCJ after replication stress as well ( Gupta et al, 2007 ). The concerted action of BLM and FANCJ with their protein partners such as RPA and FANCD2 is likely to be important for their collective role in the recovery from S-phase progression and maintenance of genomic stability. The observations that FANCD2 monoubiquitination is required for its association with chromatin and subnuclear localization with BRCA1, RAD51, MRE11-RAD50-NBS1, RPA, PCNA, and BRCA2 ( Gurtan and D'Andrea, 2006 ), together with the current results, suggest a scenario in which the critical DNA repair steps of the FA pathway are orchestrated by FANCD2 and enacted by the FANCJ and BLM helicases with HR and DNA repair proteins.

The concerted action of FANCJ and BLM helicases to unwind a DNA structure associated with a stalled replication fork or HR repair may enable subsequent processing by structure-specific nucleases to ensure genome integrity or serve to clear proteins bound to DNA (e.g. Rad51; Bugreev et al, 2007 ; Sommers et al, 2009 ) to complete recombinational repair. Both BLM and FANCJ recognize and unwind a D-loop structure ( Gupta et al, 2005 ; Bachrati et al, 2006 ), an early intermediate of HR. However, only BLM unwinds a Holliday Junction structure ( Karow et al, 2000 ; Mohaghegh et al, 2001 ; Gupta et al, 2005 ), and FANCJ does not stimulate BLM unwinding of this late HR intermediate (our unpublished data).

The functional interaction between FANCJ and BLM on the DNA substrate with a polyglycol linkage in the BLM translocating strand suggests that the helicase interaction may be important for traversing backbone damage. The ability of FANCJ to interact with BLM may facilitate unwinding past the lesion in a specific manner, since DNA unwinding by WRN or RECQ1 on the same substrate was not increased by the presence of FANCJ. The ability of the catalytically inactive FANCJ-K52R mutant protein to stimulate BLM helicase activity suggests that the protein interaction is an important factor in the functional interaction. However, further mechanistic studies are necessary to understand the importance of the physical interaction between BLM and FANCJ for DNA unwinding by the two helicases acting together perhaps in a protein complex. A paradigm for two helicases with opposite polarities functioning together was provided by the molecular characterization of the RecBCD complex in which RecB and RecD helicases, which translocate in opposite directions along ssDNA, unwind duplex DNA in the same direction by moving along complementary strands of the Watson–Crick DNA double helix ( Singleton et al, 2004 ).

Although BLM and FANCJ interact, the distinctive clinical features of BS and FA group J patients indicate that the two helicases also have independent roles. It will be important to quantify BLM protein levels in individuals with FANCJ mutations and relate this to their clinical symptoms. According to the Fanconi Anemia Mutation Database maintained by The Rockefeller University, FANCJ protein variants exist that fall into three classes: substitutions, frameshifts, and nonsense mutations. Clinical heterogeneity in FA-J patients may be dependent on the nature of the FANCJ mutation as it relates to the stability of the dysfunctional FANCJ protein it encodes. For example, western blot analysis of FA-J patient cell lines demonstrated the absence of full-length FANCJ protein in cells harbouring frameshift, nonsense, or deletion mutations, but residual full-length FANCJ protein in a cell line harbouring a FANCJ missense mutation ( Levitus et al, 2005 ). The interaction of FANCJ with BLM and the strong effect of FANCJ deficiency on BLM protein stability suggest that FA-J patient cell lines should be screened for BLM protein by western blot analysis. BLM deficiency in FA-J patients may be a contributory factor to the nature and degree of chromosomal instability, cancer, and associated phenotypes observed in the individuals.
