---
pmid: '12369822'
title: The down regulated in adenoma (dra) gene product binds to the second PDZ domain
  of the NHE3 kinase A regulatory protein (E3KARP), potentially linking intestinal
  Cl-/HCO3- exchange to Na+/H+ exchange.
authors:
- Lamprecht G
- Heil A
- Baisch S
- Lin-Wu E
- Yun CC
- Kalbacher H
- Gregor M
- Seidler U
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2002'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC10243534
doi: 10.1021/bi0259103
---

# The down regulated in adenoma (dra) gene product binds to the second PDZ domain of the NHE3 kinase A regulatory protein (E3KARP), potentially linking intestinal Cl-/HCO3- exchange to Na+/H+ exchange.
**Authors:** Lamprecht G, Heil A, Baisch S, Lin-Wu E, Yun CC, Kalbacher H, Gregor M, Seidler U
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi0259103](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi0259103)
**PMC:** [PMC10243534](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10243534/)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2002 Oct 15;41(41):12336-42. doi: 10.1021/bi0259103.

The down regulated in adenoma (dra) gene product binds to the second PDZ domain 
of the NHE3 kinase A regulatory protein (E3KARP), potentially linking intestinal 
Cl-/HCO3- exchange to Na+/H+ exchange.

Lamprecht G(1), Heil A, Baisch S, Lin-Wu E, Yun CC, Kalbacher H, Gregor M, 
Seidler U.

Author information:
(1)1st Medical Department and Medical and Natural Sciences Research Center, 
University of Tuebingen, Otfried-Mueller-Strasse 10, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany. 
hans-georg.lamprecht@uni-tuebingen.de

Intestinal electroneutral NaCl absorption is mediated by parallel operation of 
Na(+)/H(+) and Cl(-)/HCO(3)(-) exchange in the enterocyte apical membrane. The 
ion transporters involved are Na(+)/H(+) exchanger 3 (NHE3) and the down 
regulated in adenoma (dra) gene product. cAMP-mediated inhibition of NHE3 
requires the transporter to bind to the second PDZ (PSD95, disk large, ZO1) 
domain of the adapter protein NHE3 kinase A regulatory protein (E3KARP). Because 
the C-terminal four amino acids of dra are ETKF 
(glutamate-threonine-lysine-phenylalanine), resembling a PDZ interaction motif, 
we hypothesized that dra may also bind to one of the PDZ domains of E3KARP. In 
vitro the ETKF motif of dra binds to the second PDZ domain of E3KARP, the 
affinity being comparable to that of the known ligand CFTR. The C-terminal 
phenylalanine, which is an unconventional residue in PDZ interaction motifs, can 
only be substituted by the classical residue leucine, but not by other 
hydrophobic residues (valine, isoleucine). Immunofluorescence colocalizes dra, 
NHE3, and E3KARP in the apical compartment of human proximal colon. We suggest a 
model in which both NHE3 and dra bind to the second PDZ domain of E3KARP and 
that linking of the transporters occurs through dimerization of E3KARP. In such 
a model, the first PDZ domain would remain available for instance for signal 
transduction proteins.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0259103
PMID: 12369822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In polarized intestinal epithelial cells, downregulated in adenoma (DRA) is an apical Cl − / HCO 3 − exchanger that is part of neutral NaCl absorption under baseline conditions, but in cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-driven diarrheas, it is stimulated and contributes to increased anion secretion. To further understand the regulation of DRA in conditions mimicking some diarrheal diseases, Caco-2/BBE cells were exposed to forskolin (FSK) and adenosine 5′-triphosphate (ATP). FSK and ATP stimulated DRA in a concentration-dependent manner, with ATP acting via P2Y1 receptors. FSK at 1 µM and ATP at 0.25 µM had minimal to no effect on DRA given individually; however, together, they stimulated DRA to levels seen with maximum concentrations of FSK and ATP alone. In Caco-2/BBE cells expressing the Ca 2+ indicator GCaMP6s, ATP increased intracellular Ca 2+ (Ca 2+ i ) in a concentration-dependent manner, whereas FSK (1 µM), which by itself did not significantly alter Ca 2+ i , followed by 0.25 µM ATP produced a large increase in Ca 2+ that was approximately equal to the elevation caused by 1 µM ATP. 1,2-Bis(2-aminophenoxy)ethane-N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid tetrakis(acetoxymethyl ester) (BAPTA-AM) pretreatment prevented the ATP and FSK/ATP synergistically increased the DRA activity and the increase in Ca 2+ i caused by FSK/ATP. FSK/ATP synergistic stimulation of DRA was similarly observed in human colonoids. In Caco-2/BBE cells, subthreshold concentrations of FSK (cAMP) and ATP (Ca 2+ ) synergistically increased Ca 2+ i and stimulated DRA activity with both being blocked by BAPTA-AM pretreatment. Diarrheal diseases, such as bile acid diarrhea, in which both cAMP and Ca 2+ are elevated, are likely to be associated with stimulated DRA activity contributing to increased anion secretion, whereas separation of DRA from Na + /H + exchanger isoform-3 (NHE3) contributes to reduced NaCl absorption.

NEW & NOTEWORTHY The BB Cl − / HCO 3 − exchanger DRA takes part in both neutral NaCl absorption and stimulated anion secretion. Using intestinal cell line, Caco-2/BBE high concentrations of cAMP and Ca 2+ individually stimulated DRA activity, whereas low concentrations, which had no/minimal effect, synergistically stimulated DRA activity that required a synergistic increase in intracellular Ca 2+ . This study increases understanding of diarrheal diseases, such as bile salt diarrhea, in which both cAMP and elevated Ca 2+ are involved.

INTRODUCTION

SLC26A3 [downregulated in adenoma (DRA)] is an intestinal brush border (BB) Cl − / HCO 3 − exchange protein that is linked to the BB SLC9A3 [Na + /H + exchanger-3 (NHE3)] to produce the neutral NaCl absorptive process, the major way intestinal Na + absorption occurs in the period between meals ( 1 – 9 ). DRA is expressed in the largest amount in the human proximal colon but is also present in significant amounts in the human duodenum and ileum ( 3 , 6 , 7 , 10 , 55 ). It is localized to the upper crypt and villus in the small intestine and upper crypt and surface cells of the colon ( 3 , 7 , 10 ); in these cells, it is colocalized with NHE3, and in many of these cells also with cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR; 3 , 11 – 14 ). DRA is functionally and physically linked to NHE3 and takes part in neutral NaCl absorption under baseline conditions. However, in addition, in some conditions associated with elevated cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), DRA also carries out increased rates of HCO 3 − secretion and in the same cases, physically interacts with the BB Cl − channel, CFTR ( 3 , 12 ), and dissociates from NHE3. However, the role of DRA in diarrheal diseases is unclear; DRA is inhibited in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and Salmonella-related diarrheas, whereas its failure to function or failure to be produced causes congenital chloride diarrhea ( 2 , 5 , 15 , 16 ).

There is increasing evidence that increased second messengers, as occurs with most diarrheal diseases, alter DRA activity ( 2 , 3 , 5 , 8 , 9 , 12 , 13 , 16 – 23 ). Elevation in intracellular cyclic nucleotides and/or Ca 2+ is part of the pathophysiology of many diarrheal diseases; for instance, cAMP in cholera toxin-related diarrhea, guanosine 3′,5′-cyclic monophosphate (cGMP) in E. coli heat-stable enterotoxin-related diarrhea, and Ca 2+ in rotavirus-related diarrhea, whereas in bile salt-induced diarrhea both elevated cAMP and Ca 2+ contribute to the pathogenesis ( 24 – 30 ). In addition to the role of cAMP and elevated intracellular Ca 2+ signaling pathways in pathological processes, they also take part in the regulation of multiple physiological processes, in which their actions are independent, additive, synergistic, or inhibitory. In the current studies, we tested the hypotheses that both elevated cAMP and Ca 2+ stimulated DRA activity and examined the interactions of elevated cAMP and elevated Ca 2+ in DRA stimulation to determine whether they affected DRA entirely independently or if there were interactions that were additive or synergistic in polarized intestinal epithelia model cell lines.

DISCUSSION

This study demonstrates that the FSK and apical ATP induced elevated Ca 2+ to act synergistically to acutely stimulate DRA in polarized intestinal epithelial cells. Synergistic interaction of cyclic nucleotide and Ca 2+ signaling is not unique for the regulation of DRA in intestinal epithelial cells. In fact, cAMP/Ca 2+ synergy occurs in many aspects of signal transduction across species, organs, and physiologic responses, as well as is involved in transcriptional and posttranscriptional signaling. Several examples include effects on odor detection in drosophila ( 36 ), synergistic GH release from chicken pituitary ( 37 ), carbaprostacyclin (cPG12) induction of differentiation of preadipocytes to mature adipocytes ( 38 ), stimulation of c-FOS in Jurkat cells ( 39 ), and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)-induced stimulation of prolactin transcription in Jurkat cells ( 40 ). Although cAMP/Ca 2+ synergy occurs in many signaling pathways, the cross talk between the two-second messenger systems does not always involve synergy; for example, cAMP and Ca 2+ are additive but not synergistic in extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) activation in a mouse model of long-lasting long-term potentiation, related to learning ( 41 ), and there are examples in which cAMP and elevated Ca 2+ have opposing effects on the same signaling pathway, such as in metabotropic glutamate receptor signaling ( 42 ).

Intracellular Ca 2+ was necessary for the cAMP/Ca 2+ synergistic acute stimulation of DRA in Caco-2 cells since both the effect of ATP alone on DRA and the synergistic stimulation were inhibited by pretreatment with BAPTA-AM but not by extracellular EGTA at a concentration that greatly lowered the extracellular free Ca 2+ but was only present for a minute before ATP addition so as not to lower intracellular Ca 2+ . Concerning the upstream signaling, a P2Y1 receptor inhibitor prevented ATP stimulation of DRA activity. Of interest, this is the same signaling pathway involved in spreading the Ca 2+ effect across many cells following rotavirus infection of small intestinal villus enterocytes ( 33 ).

Multiple mechanisms for cross talk/synergy between cAMP/Ca 2+ signaling have been previously defined in detail. Given the involvement of apical P2Y1 receptors with PLC-IP 3 generation, the studies by Muallem and colleagues ( 43 ) are most relevant to our demonstration in Caco-2 cells that synergistic stimulation of DRA requires the magnitude of elevation of intracellular Ca 2+ also to increase synergistically. In the studies by Muallem and colleagues, cAMP increased the binding and sensitivity of IP 3 to its ER Ca 2+ channel receptor, IP 3 R, increasing the amount of Ca 2+ released per molecule of bound IP 3 , to synergistically elevate cytosolic Ca 2+ . However, multiple other mechanisms of cAMP/Ca 2+ synergy have been identified. These include, among others, Ca 2+ -dependent adenylyl cyclase activity ( 44 ) and direct effects of calmodulin (CaM) binding to the CFTR R domain, with Ca 2+ -CaM binding increasing the open probability similar to the effects of cAMP-induced stimulation via phosphorylation, with the overall effects of Ca 2+ /CaM and cAMP being additive but together achieving the maximum activity caused by either alone ( 45 ). The latter results indicate effects via a common pathway. We have previously reported that FSK/cAMP elevates intracellular Ca 2+ via Epac1 in T84 cells ( 46 ). Of note, in the present study, we showed that FSK failed to increase intracellular Ca 2+ in Caco-2 cells and in human colonoids ( Fig. 7 A and Supplemental Fig. S2).

The current studies appear to help explain previous studies in the model cell, Caco-2/BBE, in which DRA seemed to be both stimulated and inhibited by cAMP ( 8 , 13 , 14 ). We previously reported, based on use of proximity ligation assays in Caco-2/BBE cells expressing transduced NHE3 and endogenous DRA and CFTR, that under baseline conditions, DRA bound NHE3 and CFTR and NHE3 bound DRA and CFTR. These associations were dynamic. With elevation of cAMP, the interaction of NHE3 with DRA and CFTR was reduced and that between DRA and CFTR was increased, with overall activity of DRA increasing ( 3 ). The seeming contradiction of both DRA stimulation and inhibition can be explained by occurrence of reduced neutral NaCl absorption related to the previously demonstrated cAMP-induced decrease in NHE3 on the plasma membrane ( 8 ) that reduced the pool that interacts with BB DRA. In addition, the elevation of cAMP leads to increased DRA trafficking to the apical membrane where DRA interacts with CFTR and leads to increased anion secretion, as previously shown by us ( 13 ). Assuming that this occurs in cAMP/Ca 2+ synergy in normal intestinal epithelial cells as well as in Caco-2 cells, it will be important to define the magnitude of the separation of NHE3 from DRA (which is part of the mechanism of inhibition of intestinal Na absorption that occurs in diarrhea as NHE3 trafficking from the plasma membrane to the early endosomes) and that of increased binding of DRA with CFTR (which is part of the stimulation of anion secretion). In the present studies, we showed that synergistic stimulation of DRA was observed whether NHE3 was present or not, and interestingly the magnitude of synergistic stimulation in the presence of NHE3 appeared to be slightly less than when it is minimally present or absent.

The results presented here differ from the detailed studies of Lamprecht and Seidler, also using Caco-2/BBE cells ( 23 , 47 ). Those studies acutely elevated intracellular Ca 2+ with ionomycin or UTP and found that both did not alter initial rates of DRA activity but lowered the steady-state pH i achieved after ionomycin/UTP. This was interpreted to indicate that elevated intracellular Ca 2+ probably changed the pH i sensitivity of DRA as the major way Ca 2+ altered DRA activity. What explains the differences in our findings is that both FSK and apical ATP, as well as synergistic concentrations of FSK and ATP, stimulate DRA activity that can only be speculated about. The current studies, however, show DRA stimulation that involves both initial rates and steady-state pH i , effects that were reversed by BAPTA-AM, demonstrating that potential injury from elevated Ca 2+ was not occurring. It must be noted that another major difference in these two Caco-2/BBE studies relates to the mechanism of DRA stimulation. In the study by Lamprecht et al. ( 23 ), neither ionomycin nor UTP altered the plasma membrane expression of DRA, while we previously reported that, using super-resolution combined with confocal microscopy, changes in surface expression of DRA and NHE3 supported that synergist stimulation of DRA was associated with increased apical membrane DRA expression and reduced NHE3 surface expression ( 3 ). Of note, there was a major difference in the ways our studies were performed, consisting of the support the Caco-2 cells were grown on. In our studies, Caco-2 cells were grown on semipermeable supports (Transwell filters) allowing access to both apical and basolateral surfaces to bathing solutions with standardized polarization based on days postconfluency studied. Previous demonstration of Caco-2 polarization and differentiation has generally been done with cells grown on such semipermeable supports rather than the solid supports apparently used in the Lamprecht studies ( 23 , 47 ).

We expanded our studies to normal human colonoids. While similar to Caco-2/BBE cells in that in colonoids, 0.5 µM FSK failed to stimulate DRA activity ( Fig. 9 A ) and 10 µM FSK significantly stimulated it ( 13 ), 10 µM ATP failed to significantly affect colonoid DRA activity ( Fig. 9 B ). Nonetheless, the combination 0.5 µM FSK/10 µM ATP synergistically stimulated DRA activity. In parallel studies, the 1-µM ATP-induced increase in Ca 2+ (peak F/Fo reached as percent of ionomycin induced maximum increase in F/Fo) was similar in both cell models (Caco-2 cells 69 ± 10% and human colonoids 66 ± 7%) (compare Fig. 7 B and Supplemental Fig. S2). While we can conclude that ATP and cAMP synergistically stimulate DRA activity, the human colonoid studies demonstrate that the elevated Ca 2+ is not sufficient to stimulate DRA activity and indicate that there are additional downstream factors that are necessary. Further studies are needed to identify the additional factors and to understand the differences in mechanisms of synergy in Caco-2 cells and human colonoids.

The demonstration that cAMP and Ca 2+ synergistically stimulate DRA activity has relevance to pathophysiological mechanisms of multiple diarrheal diseases in which both cAMP and Ca 2+ are elevated. In each of these, there is a potential role for cAMP/Ca 2+ cross talk/synergy but in none have detailed evaluation of these interactions been achieved. PGE2 acutely elevates both intracellular Ca 2+ and cAMP in intestinal epithelial cells and is part of the pathophysiology of IBD ( 48 , 49 ), with effects on multiple intestinal cell types that likely contribute to the IBD pathophysiology (enteric nervous system, macrophages, dendritic cells, others). Bile salts signal by cAMP and protein kinase C (PKC) as part of cholerrheic enteropathy in which increased bile salt concentrations in the lumen of the colon stimulate CFTR activity while inhibiting NaCl absorption ( 50 , 51 ). In mouse B cells, cross linking the B cell antigen receptor using anti-IgM antibody initially elevates cAMP and subsequently increases intracellular Ca 2+ , which leads to synergistic increase in CD80 transcription. The latter is part of B cell activation/interferon γ production that participates in multiple viral diarrheas, including rotavirus ( 52 ). In addition, low levels of apical ATP are known to be present in some polarized cells ( 53 , 54 ) with the cause being less certain, although potential explanations include cell turnover/death, due to translocation of immunological and inflammatory cells through the tight junctions, and effects of interactions with the microbiome, among others. These low levels of ATP potentially are able to act synergistically with changes in cAMP that occur as part of digestion, as well as in diarrheal diseases, to synergistically participate in what is considered normal physiological regulation of intestinal salt and water transport. Future studies evaluating the relevance of increases in both cAMP and Ca 2+ in the same intestinal cells or in the multiple intestinal cells beyond the enterocytes that contribute to diarrheal disease pathophysiology are likely to provide a new understanding of the pathophysiology of diarrhea and to provide drug targets to develop for treating diarrheal diseases.
