---
pmid: '8458832'
title: Organization of a Clostridium thermocellum gene cluster encoding the cellulosomal
  scaffolding protein CipA and a protein possibly involved in attachment of the cellulosome
  to the cell surface.
authors:
- Fujino T
- Béguin P
- Aubert JP
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '1993'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC204254
doi: 10.1128/jb.175.7.1891-1899.1993
---

# Organization of a Clostridium thermocellum gene cluster encoding the cellulosomal scaffolding protein CipA and a protein possibly involved in attachment of the cellulosome to the cell surface.
**Authors:** Fujino T, Béguin P, Aubert JP
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jb.175.7.1891-1899.1993](https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.175.7.1891-1899.1993)
**PMC:** [PMC204254](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC204254/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 1993 Apr;175(7):1891-9. doi: 10.1128/jb.175.7.1891-1899.1993.

Organization of a Clostridium thermocellum gene cluster encoding the 
cellulosomal scaffolding protein CipA and a protein possibly involved in 
attachment of the cellulosome to the cell surface.

Fujino T(1), Béguin P, Aubert JP.

Author information:
(1)Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

The nucleotide sequence was determined for a 9.4-kb region of Clostridium 
thermocellum DNA extending from the 3' end of the gene (now termed cipA), 
encoding the S1/SL component of the cellulosome. Three open reading frames 
(ORFs) belonging to two operons were detected. They encoded polypeptides of 
1,664, 688, and 447 residues, termed ORF1p, ORF2p, and ORF3p, respectively. The 
COOH-terminal regions of the three polypeptides were highly similar and 
contained three reiterated segments of 60 to 70 residues each. Similar segments 
have been found at the NH2 terminus of the S-layer proteins of Bacillus brevis 
and Acetogenium kivui, suggesting that ORF1p, ORF2p, and ORF3p might also be 
located on the cell surface. Otherwise, the sequence of ORF1p and ORF2p gave 
little clue concerning their potential function. However, the NH2-terminal 
region of ORF3p was similar to the reiterated domains previously identified in 
CipA as receptors involved in binding the duplicated segment of 22 amino acids 
present in catalytic subunits of the cellulosome. Indeed, it was found 
previously that ORF3p binds 125I-labeled endoglucanase CelD containing the 
duplicated segment (T. Fujino, P. Béguin, and J.-P. Aubert, FEMS Microbiol. 
Lett. 94:165-170, 1992). These findings suggest that ORF3p might serve as an 
anchoring factor for the cellulosome on the cell surface by binding the 
duplicated segment that is present at the COOH end of CipA.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.175.7.1891-1899.1993
PMCID: PMC204254
PMID: 8458832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The nucleotide sequence was determined for a 9.4-kb region of Clostridium thermocellum DNA extending from the 3' end of the gene (now termed cipA), encoding the S1/SL component of the cellulosome. Three open reading frames (ORFs) belonging to two operons were detected. They encoded polypeptides of 1,664, 688, and 447 residues, termed ORF1p, ORF2p, and ORF3p, respectively. The COOH-terminal regions of the three polypeptides were highly similar and contained three reiterated segments of 60 to 70 residues each. Similar segments have been found at the NH2 terminus of the S-layer proteins of Bacillus brevis and Acetogenium kivui, suggesting that ORF1p, ORF2p, and ORF3p might also be located on the cell surface. Otherwise, the sequence of ORF1p and ORF2p gave little clue concerning their potential function. However, the NH2-terminal region of ORF3p was similar to the reiterated domains previously identified in CipA as receptors involved in binding the duplicated segment of 22 amino acids present in catalytic subunits of the cellulosome. Indeed, it was found previously that ORF3p binds 125I-labeled endoglucanase CelD containing the duplicated segment (T. Fujino, P. Béguin, and J.-P. Aubert, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 94:165-170, 1992). These findings suggest that ORF3p might serve as an anchoring factor for the cellulosome on the cell surface by binding the duplicated segment that is present at the COOH end of CipA.
