---
pmid: '7657660'
title: Phosphorylation and activation of the DNA binding activity of purified Stat1
  by the Janus protein-tyrosine kinases and the epidermal growth factor receptor.
authors:
- Quelle FW
- Thierfelder W
- Witthuhn BA
- Tang B
- Cohen S
- Ihle JN
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.35.20775
---

# Phosphorylation and activation of the DNA binding activity of purified Stat1 by the Janus protein-tyrosine kinases and the epidermal growth factor receptor.
**Authors:** Quelle FW, Thierfelder W, Witthuhn BA, Tang B, Cohen S, Ihle JN
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.270.35.20775](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.270.35.20775)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Sep 1;270(35):20775-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.35.20775.

Phosphorylation and activation of the DNA binding activity of purified Stat1 by 
the Janus protein-tyrosine kinases and the epidermal growth factor receptor.

Quelle FW(1), Thierfelder W, Witthuhn BA, Tang B, Cohen S, Ihle JN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 
Tennessee 38105, USA.

The activation of Janus protein-tyrosine kinases (Jaks) and the subsequent 
phosphorylation and activation of latent signal transducers and activators of 
transcription (Stats) are common elements in signal transduction through the 
cytokine receptor superfamily. To assess the role and specificity of Jaks in 
Stat activation, we have utilized baculovirus expression systems to produce 
Stat1 and the Jaks. Co-expression of Stat1 with Tyk2, Jak1, or Jak2 resulted in 
the specific tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat1 at Tyr701, the residue 
phosphorylated in mammalian cells stimulated with interferon gamma. 
Alternatively, Stat1, purified to apparent homogeneity from insect cell 
extracts, was phosphorylated at Tyr701 in Jak immune complex kinase reactions. 
Phosphorylation of purified Stat1 was necessary and sufficient for the 
acquisition of DNA binding activity. The specificity in both systems was 
indicated by the inability of a Jak2 catalytically inactive mutant (Jak2-Glu882) 
or the Tec protein-tyrosine kinase to phosphorylate Stat1. However, immune 
complex-purified epidermal growth factor receptor was capable of phosphorylating 
purified Stat1 at Tyr701 and activating its DNA binding activity in in vitro 
reactions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.35.20775
PMID: 7657660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
