---
pmid: '25468996'
title: E-cadherin interactome complexity and robustness resolved by quantitative proteomics.
authors:
- Guo Z
- Neilson LJ
- Zhong H
- Murray PS
- Zanivan S
- Zaidel-Bar R
journal: Sci Signal
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4972397
doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2005473
---

# E-cadherin interactome complexity and robustness resolved by quantitative proteomics.
**Authors:** Guo Z, Neilson LJ, Zhong H, Murray PS, Zanivan S, Zaidel-Bar R
**Journal:** Sci Signal (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scisignal.2005473](https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.2005473)
**PMC:** [PMC4972397](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4972397/)

## Abstract

1. Sci Signal. 2014 Dec 2;7(354):rs7. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2005473.

E-cadherin interactome complexity and robustness resolved by quantitative 
proteomics.

Guo Z(1), Neilson LJ(2), Zhong H(1), Murray PS(3), Zanivan S(2), Zaidel-Bar 
R(4).

Author information:
(1)Mechanobiology Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore 117411, Singapore.
(2)Vascular Proteomics Laboratory, Cancer Research UK Beatson Institute, Glasgow 
G61 1BD, UK.
(3)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics and Systems Biology, and 
Center of Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Columbia University, New 
York, NY 10032, USA.
(4)Mechanobiology Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore 117411, Singapore. Department of Biomedical Engineering, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore 117575, Singapore. biezbr@nus.edu.sg.

E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion and signaling plays an essential role in 
development and maintenance of healthy epithelial tissues. Adhesiveness mediated 
by E-cadherin is conferred by its extracellular cadherin domains and is 
regulated by an assembly of intracellular adaptors and enzymes associated with 
its cytoplasmic tail. We used proximity biotinylation and quantitative 
proteomics to identify 561 proteins in the vicinity of the cytoplasmic tail of 
E-cadherin. In addition, we used proteomics to identify proteins associated with 
E-cadherin-containing adhesion plaques from a cell-glass interface, which 
enabled the assignment of cellular localization to putative 
E-cadherin-interacting proteins. Moreover, by tagging identified proteins with 
GFP (green fluorescent protein), we determined the subcellular localization of 
83 putative E-cadherin-proximal proteins and identified 24 proteins that were 
previously uncharacterized as part of adherens junctions. We constructed and 
characterized a comprehensive E-cadherin interaction network of 79 published and 
394 previously uncharacterized proteins using a structure-informed database of 
protein-protein interactions. Finally, we found that calcium chelation, which 
disrupts the interaction of the extracellular E-cadherin domains, did not 
disrupt most intracellular protein interactions with E-cadherin, suggesting that 
the E-cadherin intracellular interactome is predominantly independent of 
cell-cell adhesion.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.2005473
PMCID: PMC4972397
PMID: 25468996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None.

## Full Text

Abstract

E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion and signaling plays an essential role in development and maintenance of healthy epithelial tissues. Adhesiveness is conferred by cadherin extracellular domains, and is regulated by an assembly of adaptors and enzymes associated with the cytoplasmic tail. Here, we employed proximity biotinylation and quantitative proteomics to isolate and identify 612 proteins in the vicinity of E-cadherin’s cytoplasmic tail. We used a structure-informed database of protein-protein interactions to construct the most comprehensive E-cadherin interactome to date, containing 89 known E-cadhesome components and 346 novel proteins. Moreover, through cloning and expression of GFP-tagged fusion proteins we localized 26 of the novel proteins to adherens junctions. Finally, employing calcium depletion and myosin inhibition we show the E-cadherin interactome to be remarkably robust to perturbation and essentially independent of cell-cell junctions or actomyosin contractility.

Introduction

The extracellular domains of “classical” cadherin adhesion receptors, such as epithelial (E)-cadherin, are sufficient to cluster and mediate cell-cell adhesion ( 1 ). However, connecting the cytoplasmic tail of cadherin with F-actin is crucial for cluster stability ( 2 ). Moreover, the coupling of cadherin with the force-generating actin cytoskeleton facilitates the integration of individual cell shape changes into tissue dynamics such as wound healing or morphogenesis ( 3 ). Linker proteins, most notably the catenins ( 4 ), mediate the physical linkage of cadherin with the actin cytoskeleton ( 5 ), and an array of signaling enzymes regulates their interactions through post-translational modifications (e.g.( 6 )). Additional regulatory proteins, localized at the cytoplasmic face of junctions, control actin dynamics and endocytosis ( 7 , 8 ). Together, this ensemble of structural and regulatory proteins and their interactions has been coined the cadherin adhesome (“cadhesome”)( 9 ). The cadhesome can be viewed as the “command and control” of cell-cell adhesion. Therefore, elucidating its components and their interactions is an essential step in understanding how cell adhesion is regulated in health and mis-regulated in disease.

Due to its intricate connections with the cytoskeleton the structural cadhesome is mostly insoluble, rendering it refractory to most biochemical assays, such as co-immunoprecipitation ( 10 ). Furthermore, many of the regulatory cadhesome components associate with it through transient and low affinity interactions. Nevertheless, work from many labs over the past 30 years has identified more than 170 proteins as cadhesome components ( 9 ). This number is comparable to the size of the literature-based integrin adhesome ( 11 ). In recent years, the integrin adhesome has been probed using quantitative mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics and the number of proteins identified by these approaches was significantly higher than what was previously described in the literature ( 12 – 14 ). As integrin- and cadherin-based adhesions have evolved in parallel and have similar functions, we anticipated the complexity of the cadhesome would be comparable to that of the integrin adhesome, and chose to probe this complexity using mass spectrometry.

Adhesive interactions between “classical” cadherin receptors in trans are calcium-dependent ( 15 ). Calcium ion binding rigidifies the crescent shape of the extracellular domain of cadherin ( 16 , 17 ), stabilizes the X-dimer interface surface ( 18 , 19 ) and energetically favors strand swapping ( 20 ). Calcium depletion was shown to dissociate trans-dimers and at the same time promote the formation of lateral dimers of cadherin ( 21 ). E-cadherin has been reported to undergo endocytosis following calcium depletion, into vesicles that remain in close proximity to the plasma membrane ( 22 , 23 ). Several linker proteins, including p120-catenin, beta-catenin and vinculin, were shown to remain co-localized with endocytosed E-cadherin ( 22 , 23 ). However, the fate of the entire cadhesome in response to calcium depletion and loss of cell-cell adhesion has not been addressed to date.

E-cadherin adhesions are intimately associated with actomyosin structures ( 24 , 25 ) and a growing body of work shows that forces play an important role in regulating cadherin dynamics ( 26 – 28 ). While a number of proteins, most notably α-catenin, vinculin, and eplin, have been implicated in cadherin mechanotransduction ( 29 – 31 ), the global changes in the cadhesome elicited by inhibition of myosin-generated tension are still unknown.

Here, using E-cadherin proximity biotinylation proteomics followed by GFP-tagged protein localization and immunofluorescence microscopy we provide a comprehensive analysis of the molecular composition and localization of the E-cadherin interactome and its response to two perturbations: inhibition of myosin activity and calcium depletion. Our mapping of the E-cadherin vicinal proteins validates much of the literature-based cadhesome, identifies many novel components and makes numerous predictions regarding the structure and regulation of “classical” cadherin adhesions. Unexpectedly, we found the composition of the E-cadhesome to be mostly independent of trans-ligation of cadherin receptors (cell-cell adhesion) and of myosin-generated contractility.

Discussion

High resolution MS is capable of accurately identifying large mixtures of proteins over a wide range of abundance. Therefore, the challenge in characterizing the protein composition of a given cellular structure lies in purifying its components for MS analysis. We used BioID, a technique in which a promiscuous biotin ligase, BirA*, is fused to a protein of interest, in this case E-cadherin, enabling biotinylation of vicinal proteins ( 32 ). This method was first used to identify proteins in close proximity to nuclear lamin-A and subsequently was applied to the tight junction protein ZO-1 ( 43 ). A similar method for spatially restricted biotinylation, employing a different enzyme, was used for proteomic mapping of the mitochondia ( 44 ). Recently, Van Itallie et. al. also fused BirA* to the cytoplasmic tail of E-cadherin ( 45 ). They identified 303 proteins associated with E-cadherin in MDCK cells, 127 of which overlap with the 612 proteins found in this paper ( Supplementary Table 4 ). A notable difference between our studies is the choice of negative control. We used cells not expressing E-cad-BirA* as a negative control, whereas Van Itallie et. al. used cells expressing a cytoplasmic BirA*.

The exact radius within which vicinal proteins are biotinylated by BirA* is not established yet. However, Roux et. al. estimated that 50% of the proteins they identified using bioID reside within 20-30nm of BirA* ( 32 ). Van Itallie et. al. identified a different subset of proteins depending on which end of ZO-1 they fused BirA*, strengthening the notion that the radius of biotinylation is not much larger than the size of a single protein. Comparing the 408 proteins identified by the fusion of BirA* to either end of ZO-1( 43 ) with the 612 proteins we identified by E-cad-BirA* MS we find an overlap of only 84 proteins ( Supplementary Table 4 ), further supporting the specificity of the technique and the unique composition of tight versus adherens junctions.

A good indication of the efficacy of the E-cad-BirA* approach was the identification of 89 out of 173 literature-based cadhesome proteins. Of the 84 previously described components that were not identified by E-cad-BirA* most were cytoplasmic proteins, primarily kinases and phosphatases, as well as GTPases. Thus, it should be noted that the brief permeabilization step preceding lysis of cells for MS most likely introduced a bias towards identifying insoluble proteins. However, it may also be that some of the missed components are not expressed in MKN28 or that their localization is dependent on certain conditions. Future proteomic analysis, using different cell types and under various conditions will help to distinguish between these possibilities and refine the E-cadhesome.

Our proteomic analysis as well as localization analysis provided a wealth of candidate cadhesome proteins that can now be tested further. Importantly, in addition to the expansion of existing classes of cadhesome components our unbiased approach also identified proteins with functions that have not previously been thought of as integral to cadherin adhesions. These include, for example, proteins involved in endocytosis, translation and transcription. While there are some examples of transcription factors playing a second role in cell-cell junctions, most notably β-catenin ( 46 ), and while there is some anecdotal evidence for junctional localization of mRNA and translation machinery ( 47 ), our GFP-tagging of candidate proteins from these functional groups suggests that most of them do not localize to cell-cell junctions. Nevertheless, the true extent of intertwining between these cellular functions and cadherin adhesion warrants further study.

Although our protocol was aimed to purify proteins associated with E-cadherin at adherens junctions, the expression of GFP-tagged candidates clearly showed that many of the E-cad-BirA* interactome proteins are found in other locations in the cell. It is reasonable to believe E-cadherin interacts with these proteins at various stages of its lifetime and these interactions may have profound implications for cell adhesion. A recent genome wide RNAi screen in drosophila S2 cells uncovered over 800 genes required for cadherin-mediated cell adhesion, and only a fraction of them localized to cell-cell junctions ( 48 ). Between our list of E-cad-BirA* proteins and the list of genes from Toret et. al. ( 48 ) we found 64 overlapping genes, 39 of which are involved in trafficking, translation or transcription ( Supplementary Table 4 ). 56 of the overlapping genes are novel and we consider them particularly promising candidates for further investigation since they have now been shown independently to be essential for cell adhesion and closely associated with E-cadherin. Examples of such proteins are the receptor SCARB1, the RhoGAP ARHGAP1, and the actin binding adaptors ANLN and LASP1.

Proximal biotinylation combined with quantitative mass spectrometry is a strong tool to address the molecular composition of adherens junctions. To understand how cell adhesion is regulated we need to have a comprehensive map of the cadhesome, and the resource we provide here goes a long way in that direction. Surprisingly, we found the E-cadhesome composition to be mostly independent of cell-cell junctions, suggesting that adherens junctions are unique by virtue of their structural organization, and/or posttranslational modification, which will need to be probed by other means.
