---
pmid: '20421506'
title: Mapping the physical and functional interactions between the tumor suppressors
  p53 and BRCA2.
authors:
- Rajagopalan S
- Andreeva A
- Rutherford TJ
- Fersht AR
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2889359
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1003689107
---

# Mapping the physical and functional interactions between the tumor suppressors p53 and BRCA2.
**Authors:** Rajagopalan S, Andreeva A, Rutherford TJ, Fersht AR
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1003689107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1003689107)
**PMC:** [PMC2889359](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2889359/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 May 11;107(19):8587-92. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1003689107. Epub 2010 Apr 26.

Mapping the physical and functional interactions between the tumor suppressors 
p53 and BRCA2.

Rajagopalan S(1), Andreeva A, Rutherford TJ, Fersht AR.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Protein Engineering and Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Medical 
Research Council Centre, Cambridge, CB2 0QH, UK.

p53 maintains genome integrity either by regulating the transcription of genes 
involved in cell cycle, apoptosis, and DNA repair or by interacting with partner 
proteins. Here we provide evidence for a direct physical interaction between the 
tumor suppressors p53 and BRCA2. We found that the transactivation domain of p53 
made specific interactions with the C-terminal 
oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide-binding-fold domains of BRCA2 (BRCA2(CTD)). A 
second distinct site situated on the p53 DNA-binding domain, bound to a region 
containing BRC repeats of BRCA2 (BRCA2([BRC1-8])) and may contribute 
synergistically for high affinity association of intact full-length proteins. 
Overexpression of BRCA2 and BRCA2(CTD) suppressed the transcriptional activity 
of p53 with a concomitant reduction in the expression of p53-target genes such 
as Bax and p21. Consequently, p53-mediated apoptosis was significantly 
attenuated by BRCA2. The observed physical association of p53 and BRCA2 may have 
important functional implications in the p53 transactivation-independent 
suppression of homologous recombination and suggests a possible interregulatory 
role for both proteins in apoptosis and DNA repair.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1003689107
PMCID: PMC2889359
PMID: 20421506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

p53 maintains genome integrity either by regulating the transcription of genes involved in cell cycle, apoptosis, and DNA repair or by interacting with partner proteins. Here we provide evidence for a direct physical interaction between the tumor suppressors p53 and BRCA2. We found that the transactivation domain of p53 made specific interactions with the C-terminal oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide-binding-fold domains of BRCA2 (BRCA2 CTD ). A second distinct site situated on the p53 DNA-binding domain, bound to a region containing BRC repeats of BRCA2 (BRCA2 [BRC1-8] ) and may contribute synergistically for high affinity association of intact full-length proteins. Overexpression of BRCA2 and BRCA2 CTD suppressed the transcriptional activity of p53 with a concomitant reduction in the expression of p53-target genes such as Bax and p21. Consequently, p53-mediated apoptosis was significantly attenuated by BRCA2. The observed physical association of p53 and BRCA2 may have important functional implications in the p53 transactivation-independent suppression of homologous recombination and suggests a possible interregulatory role for both proteins in apoptosis and DNA repair.

Discussion

In the present study, we mapped a moderate affinity interaction between the transactivation domain (35–57) of p53 and C-terminal OB domains (OB2 and OB3) of BRCA2. A secondary weak interaction was identified between the p53 DNA-binding domain and BRCA2 [BRC1-8] , which may act synergistically to form a head-to-tail complex between p53 and BRCA2.

Simultaneous loss of BRCA2 and p53 synergistically drives genomic instability and down-regulation of apoptosis. Strikingly, loss of BRCA2 in T cells leads to accumulation of chromosomal aberrations resulting in increased p53-mediated apoptosis ( 41 ). We found that overexpression of BRCA2 and BRCA2 CTD suppresses the transcriptional activity of p53 with a concomitant reduction in the expression levels of p53-target genes. Furthermore, a significant inhibition in p53-mediated apoptosis was observed when BRCA2 and BRCA2 CTD were overexpressed. The inhibition of p53 transactivation by BRCA2 is probably mediated by the direct physical association between the p53 TAD2 and OB domains of BRCA2. The fact that TAD2 is important for transactivation function of p53 is evident from the reports that just TAD2 alone in flp53 (Δ1-39) is found to be sufficient for transcriptional activation ( 29 ). Furthermore, several transcriptional coactivators such as PC4 and the p62/Tfb1 subunit of TFIIH interact with the p53 TAD2 domain and regulate its function ( 33 , 34 ). For example, interaction between p53 TAD2 and the p62/Tfb1 subunit of TFIIH is important for the recruitment of p53 to the TFIIH complex and for stimulation of transcriptional elongation ( 34 ). Hence, BRCA2 OB domains probably compete for binding with TFIIH (or other coactivators of basal transcription machinery) to p53 TAD2, thereby suppressing the transcriptional activity of p53.

The physical association between p53 and BRCA2 may also have important implications in the control of HR. Precise control of HR is essential to ensure genetic stability because excess HR can be deleterious and induces chromosomal aberrations. The initial steps in HR involve recognition and preprocessing of the DNA lesions to form ssDNA tails. The resulting 3′- ssDNA is then coated with RPA followed by assembly of RAD51 that forms polymers along ssDNA–nucleoprotein filaments. This process is assisted by BRCA2, which binds to DNA and RAD51 and delivers RAD51 to the sites with DNA breaks ( 42 ). p53 is known to suppress HR as evidenced by several analyses demonstrating that p53 -/- mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) have higher levels of HR than p53 +/+ MEFs and that p53 +/- MEFs show an intermediate response ( 12 ). p53 binds to each of the factors involved at the early steps of HR such as RAD51, RPA, and BRCA2 ( 15 – 17 ). Furthermore, whereas cells expressing both wild-type and transactivation deficient (L22Q/W23S) p53 show HR suppression, mutations affecting p53 TAD2 (D48H/D49H and W53S/F54S) have no effect on HR, suggesting that this region of p53 plays an important role in HR regulation ( 16 ). Most importantly, as we demonstrate here, p53 TAD2 is not only involved in interaction with RPA but also with BRCA2 CTD . Because p53 interacts with both BRCA2 CTD and BRCA2 [BRC1-8] , each of which is essential for HR, it is tempting to speculate that p53 might directly interfere in HR through its association with BRCA2. Moreover, BRCA2 exists in complex with RAD51, which is yet another target for p53 binding ( 15 ). p53 might associate with BRCA2-RAD51 complex and regulate HR by either disrupting this complex or preventing its binding to DNA. Thus HR modulation by p53 may occur at different stages through its binding to RPA, RAD51, and BRCA2, thereby ensuring the fidelity of DNA repair and maintenance of genome integrity ( Fig. 6 ). While this is speculative at the moment, further investigations would shed more light on the mechanism by which p53 interferes with BRCA2-mediated HR.

Methods

Details of protein purification, binding experiments, and cell biology assays are provided in SI Text .
