---
pmid: '11688558'
title: The zebrafish neckless mutation reveals a requirement for raldh2 in mesodermal
  signals that pattern the hindbrain.
authors:
- Begemann G
- Schilling TF
- Rauch GJ
- Geisler R
- Ingham PW
journal: Development
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.128.16.3081
---

# The zebrafish neckless mutation reveals a requirement for raldh2 in mesodermal signals that pattern the hindbrain.
**Authors:** Begemann G, Schilling TF, Rauch GJ, Geisler R, Ingham PW
**Journal:** Development (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.128.16.3081](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.128.16.3081)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2001 Aug;128(16):3081-94. doi: 10.1242/dev.128.16.3081.

The zebrafish neckless mutation reveals a requirement for raldh2 in mesodermal 
signals that pattern the hindbrain.

Begemann G(1), Schilling TF, Rauch GJ, Geisler R, Ingham PW.

Author information:
(1)MRC Intercellular Signalling Group, Centre for Developmental Genetics, 
University of Sheffield School of Medicine and Biomedical Science, Western Bank, 
UK.

We describe a new zebrafish mutation, neckless, and present evidence that it 
inactivates retinaldehyde dehydrogenase type 2, an enzyme involved in retinoic 
acid biosynthesis. neckless embryos are characterised by a truncation of the 
anteroposterior axis anterior to the somites, defects in midline mesendodermal 
tissues and absence of pectoral fins. At a similar anteroposterior level within 
the nervous system, expression of the retinoic acid receptor a and hoxb4 genes 
is delayed and significantly reduced. Consistent with a primary defect in 
retinoic acid signalling, some of these defects in neckless mutants can be 
rescued by application of exogenous retinoic acid. We use mosaic analysis to 
show that the reduction in hoxb4 expression in the nervous system is a non-cell 
autonomous effect, reflecting a requirement for retinoic acid signalling from 
adjacent paraxial mesoderm. Together, our results demonstrate a conserved role 
for retinaldehyde dehydrogenase type 2 in patterning the posterior cranial 
mesoderm of the vertebrate embryo and provide definitive evidence for an 
involvement of endogenous retinoic acid in signalling between the paraxial 
mesoderm and neural tube.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.128.16.3081
PMID: 11688558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
