---
pmid: '20489023'
title: A global protein kinase and phosphatase interaction network in yeast.
authors:
- Breitkreutz A
- Choi H
- Sharom JR
- Boucher L
- Neduva V
- Larsen B
- Lin ZY
- Breitkreutz BJ
- Stark C
- Liu G
- Ahn J
- Dewar-Darch D
- Reguly T
- Tang X
- Almeida R
- Qin ZS
- Pawson T
- Gingras AC
- Nesvizhskii AI
- Tyers M
journal: Science
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC3983991
doi: 10.1126/science.1176495
---

# A global protein kinase and phosphatase interaction network in yeast.
**Authors:** Breitkreutz A, Choi H, Sharom JR, Boucher L, Neduva V, Larsen B, Lin ZY, Breitkreutz BJ, Stark C, Liu G, Ahn J, Dewar-Darch D, Reguly T, Tang X, Almeida R, Qin ZS, Pawson T, Gingras AC, Nesvizhskii AI, Tyers M
**Journal:** Science (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1176495](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1176495)
**PMC:** [PMC3983991](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3983991/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2010 May 21;328(5981):1043-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1176495.

A global protein kinase and phosphatase interaction network in yeast.

Breitkreutz A(1), Choi H, Sharom JR, Boucher L, Neduva V, Larsen B, Lin ZY, 
Breitkreutz BJ, Stark C, Liu G, Ahn J, Dewar-Darch D, Reguly T, Tang X, Almeida 
R, Qin ZS, Pawson T, Gingras AC, Nesvizhskii AI, Tyers M.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Systems Biology, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, 600 
University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1X5, Canada.

Comment in
    Science. 2010 May 21;328(5981):983-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1190993.

The interactions of protein kinases and phosphatases with their regulatory 
subunits and substrates underpin cellular regulation. We identified a kinase and 
phosphatase interaction (KPI) network of 1844 interactions in budding yeast by 
mass spectrometric analysis of protein complexes. The KPI network contained many 
dense local regions of interactions that suggested new functions. Notably, the 
cell cycle phosphatase Cdc14 associated with multiple kinases that revealed 
roles for Cdc14 in mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling, the DNA damage 
response, and metabolism, whereas interactions of the target of rapamycin 
complex 1 (TORC1) uncovered new effector kinases in nitrogen and carbon 
metabolism. An extensive backbone of kinase-kinase interactions cross-connects 
the proteome and may serve to coordinate diverse cellular responses.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1176495
PMCID: PMC3983991
PMID: 20489023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The interactions of protein kinases and phosphatases with their regulatory subunits and substrates underpin cellular regulation. We identified a kinase and phosphatase interaction (KPI) network of 1844 interactions in budding yeast by mass spectrometric analysis of protein complexes. The KPI network contained many dense local regions of interactions that suggested new functions. Notably, the cell cycle phosphatase Cdc14 associated with multiple kinases that revealed roles for Cdc14 in mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling, the DNA damage response, and metabolism, whereas interactions of the target of rapamycin complex 1 (TORC1) uncovered new effector kinases in nitrogen and carbon metabolism. An extensive backbone of kinase-kinase interactions cross-connects the proteome and may serve to coordinate diverse cellular responses.
