---
pmid: '30021884'
title: Histone Interaction Landscapes Visualized by Crosslinking Mass Spectrometry
  in Intact Cell Nuclei.
authors:
- Fasci D
- van Ingen H
- Scheltema RA
- Heck AJR
journal: Mol Cell Proteomics
year: '2018'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6166682
doi: 10.1074/mcp.RA118.000924
---

# Histone Interaction Landscapes Visualized by Crosslinking Mass Spectrometry in Intact Cell Nuclei.
**Authors:** Fasci D, van Ingen H, Scheltema RA, Heck AJR
**Journal:** Mol Cell Proteomics (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1074/mcp.RA118.000924](https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.RA118.000924)
**PMC:** [PMC6166682](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6166682/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2018 Oct;17(10):2018-2033. doi: 10.1074/mcp.RA118.000924.
 Epub 2018 Jul 18.

Histone Interaction Landscapes Visualized by Crosslinking Mass Spectrometry in 
Intact Cell Nuclei.

Fasci D(1)(2), van Ingen H(3), Scheltema RA(4)(2), Heck AJR(5)(2).

Author information:
(1)From the ‡Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for 
Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences.
(2)§Netherlands Proteomics Centre, and.
(3)¶NMR Spectroscopy Research Group, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, 
University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)From the ‡Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for 
Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences; 
R.A.Scheltema@uu.nl.
(5)From the ‡Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for 
Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences; 
A.J.R.Heck@uu.nl.

Cells organize their actions partly through tightly controlled protein-protein 
interactions-collectively termed the interactome. Here we use crosslinking mass 
spectrometry (XL-MS) to chart the protein-protein interactions in intact human 
nuclei. Overall, we identified ∼8,700 crosslinks, of which 2/3 represent links 
connecting distinct proteins. From these data, we gain insights on interactions 
involving histone proteins. We observed that core histones on the nucleosomes 
expose well-defined interaction hot spots. For several nucleosome-interacting 
proteins, such as USF3 and Ran GTPase, the data allowed us to build 
low-resolution models of their binding mode to the nucleosome. For HMGN2, the 
data guided the construction of a refined model of the interaction with the 
nucleosome, based on complementary NMR, XL-MS, and modeling. Excitingly, the 
analysis of crosslinks carrying posttranslational modifications allowed us to 
extract how specific modifications influence nucleosome interactions. Overall, 
our data depository will support future structural and functional analysis of 
cell nuclei, including the nucleoprotein assemblies they harbor.

© 2018 Fasci et al.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.RA118.000924
PMCID: PMC6166682
PMID: 30021884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Cells organize their actions partly through tightly controlled protein-protein interactions—collectively termed the interactome. Here we use crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) to chart the protein-protein interactions in intact human nuclei. Overall, we identified ∼8,700 crosslinks, of which 2/3 represent links connecting distinct proteins. From these data, we gain insights on interactions involving histone proteins. We observed that core histones on the nucleosomes expose well-defined interaction hot spots. For several nucleosome-interacting proteins, such as USF3 and Ran GTPase, the data allowed us to build low-resolution models of their binding mode to the nucleosome. For HMGN2, the data guided the construction of a refined model of the interaction with the nucleosome, based on complementary NMR, XL-MS, and modeling. Excitingly, the analysis of crosslinks carrying posttranslational modifications allowed us to extract how specific modifications influence nucleosome interactions. Overall, our data depository will support future structural and functional analysis of cell nuclei, including the nucleoprotein assemblies they harbor.

DISCUSSION

XL-MS experiments have so far been mostly applied to characterize the architecture of purified complexes or reconstituted recombinant complexes ( 24 , 28 , 29 ). More proteome-wide XL-MS studies have been challenging due to the inability to obtain a deep sampling of the cellular PPIs. Here we describe a strategy to apply XL-MS to the cell nucleus that maximizes crosslinking efficiency, while preserving the cellular environment. The crosslinking of intact nuclei coupled with sequential detergent fractionation and the crosslinks search with the Proteome Discoverer integrated XlinkX software ( 19 , 36 ) allowed the overall unambiguous identification of over ∼8,700 crosslinks at an FDR of 1% and down to a reliable depth of ∼1.5e4 copies per cell (defined here as the first quartile of the detected copy numbers). The validation of our XL-MS data was carried out through mapping of a subset of crosslinks onto available high-resolution structures of nuclear complexes and through the validation of the interaction of several nucleosome-interacting proteins. In addition, the XL-MS data revealed an overview of chromatin associated PPIs and for the proteins engaged in a high number of crosslinks also provided structural details of specific protein-protein interactions. Notably, we provide/refine structural models of the interaction of USF3, HMGN2 and Ran to the nucleosome.

The ability to search through XlinkX for crosslinks carrying PTMs allowed the identification of additional crosslinked peptides harboring at least one PTM. While the road to characterize PTM-dependent PPIs is still very challenging due to the transient nature of such interactions, further often hampered by the low stoichiometry of PTMs, through the identification of the interaction between hn-RNPK and the nucleosome potentially regulated by ubiquitin, we demonstrate that XL-MS can be harnessed to investigate how PTMs regulate PPIs.

Despite the potential of XL-MS studies in the characterization of endogenous PPIs, there are still limitations that complicate the application of this technology for proteome-wide interactome studies. The major challenge is represented by the ability to identify and filter out nonspecific interactions and by challenges in validating novel observed PPIs. Performing the analysis on crosslinks defining PPIs observed across biological replicates can help in the identification of genuine specific interactions. However, if crosslinking is performed after cell lysis even reproducible crosslinks could reveal nonspecific interactions due to protein mislocalization occurring upon cell disruption. To take this into account, our approach relied on a gentle lysis protocol to keep the cell nuclei intact while preserving as much as possible the native nuclear environment. This approach aimed to reduce contamination across cellular compartments to decrease the number of nonspecific interactions identified compared with other nuclear lysate preparations. Regarding the validation of XL-MS data, while the mapping of crosslinks onto available resolution structure represent a reliable test to validate crosslinks, the orthogonal validation of novel PPIs especially if detected in fractions that are not soluble in physiological buffer conditions like chromatin remains problematic. These interactions are difficult to validate endogenously with classic biochemical methods like co-immunoprecipitation. A solution around this problem is the attempt to in vitro reconstitute the interaction under study; however, this is labor intensive and can be limited by the ability to recombinantly express the proteins involved in the interaction or by the absence of co-factors or adapter proteins needed to stabilize the interaction. While there is a long way to go to establish a method for the statistical validation of interactions from proteome-wide XL-MS studies, the integration with other quantitative mass spectrometry approaches has been shown to be beneficial ( 78 ) if the analysis is focused on specific protein targets obtained with similar experimental setup.

Despite these challenges, our findings demonstrate that XL-MS can contribute to the investigation of endogenous PPIs and at the same time, for the proteins displaying an extensive crosslinking profile, provide complementary insight into their regulation complete with distance constraints allowing for mapping of the subunits into models as has been demonstrated previously in many crosslinking MS publications. The application of more targeted approaches for the identification of interactors of endogenous proteins ( i.e. through specific enrichment) will help to overcome the limitations of XL-MS for the investigation of cellular PPIs. Moreover, further increases in data acquisition rates and proteome depth are to be expected as newer generations of MS platforms with higher sequencing rates and novel hybrid fragmentation techniques ( e.g. EThcD and UV-PD) ( 79 – 81 ) become more routinely available. As such, our work sets the basis to tackle the next challenges in the XL-MS field: the characterization of transient PPIs and their regulation by the different PTMs.

It has been clearly stated that the future in structural biology is hybrid ( 82 ), whereby the structural models are defined by combination of methods, such as NMR, X-ray crystallography, and electron microscopy. Here, we show by using our nuclear XL-MS dataset in conjunction with NMR, X-ray crystallography and electron microscopy data that XL-MS represents a clear valuable pillar to this hybrid future in structural biology.
