---
pmid: '12829275'
title: Bacterial mercury resistance from atoms to ecosystems.
authors:
- Barkay T
- Miller SM
- Summers AO
journal: FEMS Microbiol Rev
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/S0168-6445(03)00046-9
---

# Bacterial mercury resistance from atoms to ecosystems.
**Authors:** Barkay T, Miller SM, Summers AO
**Journal:** FEMS Microbiol Rev (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0168-6445(03)00046-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0168-6445(03)00046-9)

## Abstract

1. FEMS Microbiol Rev. 2003 Jun;27(2-3):355-84. doi:
10.1016/S0168-6445(03)00046-9.

Bacterial mercury resistance from atoms to ecosystems.

Barkay T(1), Miller SM, Summers AO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Cook College, Rutgers 
University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA. barkay@aesop.rutgers.edu

Bacterial resistance to inorganic and organic mercury compounds (HgR) is one of 
the most widely observed phenotypes in eubacteria. Loci conferring HgR in 
Gram-positive or Gram-negative bacteria typically have at minimum a mercuric 
reductase enzyme (MerA) that reduces reactive ionic Hg(II) to volatile, 
relatively inert, monoatomic Hg(0) vapor and a membrane-bound protein (MerT) for 
uptake of Hg(II) arranged in an operon under control of MerR, a novel 
metal-responsive regulator. Many HgR loci encode an additional enzyme, MerB, 
that degrades organomercurials by protonolysis, and one or more additional 
proteins apparently involved in transport. Genes conferring HgR occur on 
chromosomes, plasmids, and transposons and their operon arrangements can be 
quite diverse, frequently involving duplications of the above noted structural 
genes, several of which are modular themselves. How this very mobile and plastic 
suite of proteins protects host cells from this pervasive toxic metal, what 
roles it has in the biogeochemical cycling of Hg, and how it has been employed 
in ameliorating environmental contamination are the subjects of this review.

DOI: 10.1016/S0168-6445(03)00046-9
PMID: 12829275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
