---
pmid: '11057907'
title: Activation of the IkappaB kinase complex by TRAF6 requires a dimeric ubiquitin-conjugating
  enzyme complex and a unique polyubiquitin chain.
authors:
- Deng L
- Wang C
- Spencer E
- Yang L
- Braun A
- You J
- Slaughter C
- Pickart C
- Chen ZJ
journal: Cell
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)00126-4
---

# Activation of the IkappaB kinase complex by TRAF6 requires a dimeric ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme complex and a unique polyubiquitin chain.
**Authors:** Deng L, Wang C, Spencer E, Yang L, Braun A, You J, Slaughter C, Pickart C, Chen ZJ
**Journal:** Cell (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)00126-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)00126-4)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2000 Oct 13;103(2):351-61. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)00126-4.

Activation of the IkappaB kinase complex by TRAF6 requires a dimeric 
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme complex and a unique polyubiquitin chain.

Deng L(1), Wang C, Spencer E, Yang L, Braun A, You J, Slaughter C, Pickart C, 
Chen ZJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas 75390, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2018 Apr;19(4):212. doi: 10.1038/nrm.2018.9.

TRAF6 is a signal transducer in the NF-kappaB pathway that activates IkappaB 
kinase (IKK) in response to proinflammatory cytokines. We have purified a 
heterodimeric protein complex that links TRAF6 to IKK activation. Peptide mass 
fingerprinting analysis reveals that this complex is composed of the ubiquitin 
conjugating enzyme Ubc13 and the Ubc-like protein Uev1A. We find that TRAF6, a 
RING domain protein, functions together with Ubc13/Uev1A to catalyze the 
synthesis of unique polyubiquitin chains linked through lysine-63 (K63) of 
ubiquitin. Blockade of this polyubiquitin chain synthesis, but not inhibition of 
the proteasome, prevents the activation of IKK by TRAF6. These results unveil a 
new regulatory function for ubiquitin, in which IKK is activated through the 
assembly of K63-linked polyubiquitin chains.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)00126-4
PMID: 11057907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
