---
pmid: '7815540'
title: Simian virus 40 large T antigen affects the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell cycle
  and interacts with p34CDC28.
authors:
- Nacht M
- Reed SI
- Alwine JC
journal: J Virol
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC188639
doi: 10.1128/JVI.69.2.756-763.1995
---

# Simian virus 40 large T antigen affects the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell cycle and interacts with p34CDC28.
**Authors:** Nacht M, Reed SI, Alwine JC
**Journal:** J Virol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.69.2.756-763.1995](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.69.2.756-763.1995)
**PMC:** [PMC188639](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC188639/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 1995 Feb;69(2):756-63. doi: 10.1128/JVI.69.2.756-763.1995.

Simian virus 40 large T antigen affects the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell cycle 
and interacts with p34CDC28.

Nacht M(1), Reed SI, Alwine JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania, School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia 19104-6142.

Simian virus 40 tumor (T) antigen, an established viral oncoprotein, causes 
alterations in cell growth control through interacting with, and altering the 
function of, cellular proteins. To examine the effects of T antigen on cell 
growth control, and to identify the cellular proteins with which it may 
functionally interact, T antigen was expressed in the budding yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The yeast cells expressing T antigen showed 
morphological alterations as well as growth inhibition attributable, at least in 
part, to a lag in progression from G1 to S. This point in the cell cycle is also 
known to be affected by T antigen in mammalian cells. Both p34CDC28 and 
p34CDC2Hs were shown to bind to a chimeric T antigen-glutathione S-transferase 
fusion protein, indicating that T antigen interacts directly with cell cycle 
proteins which control the G1 to S transition. This interaction was confirmed by 
in vivo cross-linking experiments, in which T antigen and p34CDC28 were 
coimmunoprecipitated from extracts of T-antigen-expressing yeast cells. These 
immunoprecipitated complexes could phosphorylate histone H1, indicating that 
kinase activity was retained. In addition, in autophosphorylation reactions, the 
complexes phosphorylated a novel 60-kDa protein which appeared to be 
underphosphorylated (or underrepresented) in p34CDC28-containing complexes from 
cells which did not express T antigen. These results suggest that T antigen 
interacts with p34CDC28 and alters the kinase function of p34CDC28-containing 
complexes. These events correlate with alterations in the yeast cell cycle at 
the G1 to S transition.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.69.2.756-763.1995
PMCID: PMC188639
PMID: 7815540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Simian virus 40 tumor (T) antigen, an established viral oncoprotein, causes alterations in cell growth control through interacting with, and altering the function of, cellular proteins. To examine the effects of T antigen on cell growth control, and to identify the cellular proteins with which it may functionally interact, T antigen was expressed in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The yeast cells expressing T antigen showed morphological alterations as well as growth inhibition attributable, at least in part, to a lag in progression from G1 to S. This point in the cell cycle is also known to be affected by T antigen in mammalian cells. Both p34CDC28 and p34CDC2Hs were shown to bind to a chimeric T antigen-glutathione S-transferase fusion protein, indicating that T antigen interacts directly with cell cycle proteins which control the G1 to S transition. This interaction was confirmed by in vivo cross-linking experiments, in which T antigen and p34CDC28 were coimmunoprecipitated from extracts of T-antigen-expressing yeast cells. These immunoprecipitated complexes could phosphorylate histone H1, indicating that kinase activity was retained. In addition, in autophosphorylation reactions, the complexes phosphorylated a novel 60-kDa protein which appeared to be underphosphorylated (or underrepresented) in p34CDC28-containing complexes from cells which did not express T antigen. These results suggest that T antigen interacts with p34CDC28 and alters the kinase function of p34CDC28-containing complexes. These events correlate with alterations in the yeast cell cycle at the G1 to S transition.
