---
pmid: '22150645'
title: Pure haploinsufficiency for Dravet syndrome Na(V)1.1 (SCN1A) sodium channel
  truncating mutations.
authors:
- Bechi G
- Scalmani P
- Schiavon E
- Rusconi R
- Franceschetti S
- Mantegazza M
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC12343310
doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03346.x
---

# Pure haploinsufficiency for Dravet syndrome Na(V)1.1 (SCN1A) sodium channel truncating mutations.
**Authors:** Bechi G, Scalmani P, Schiavon E, Rusconi R, Franceschetti S, Mantegazza M
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03346.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03346.x)
**PMC:** [PMC12343310](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12343310/)

## Abstract

1. Epilepsia. 2012 Jan;53(1):87-100. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03346.x. Epub 
2011 Dec 9.

Pure haploinsufficiency for Dravet syndrome Na(V)1.1 (SCN1A) sodium channel 
truncating mutations.

Bechi G(1), Scalmani P, Schiavon E, Rusconi R, Franceschetti S, Mantegazza M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurophysiopathology, Besta Foundation Neurological Institute, 
Milan, Italy.

PURPOSE: Dravet syndrome (DS), a devastating epileptic encephalopathy, is mostly 
caused by mutations of the SCN1A gene, coding for the voltage-gated Na(+) 
channel Na(V)1.1 α subunit. About 50% of SCN1A DS mutations truncate Na(V)1.1, 
possibly causing complete loss of its function. However, it has not been 
investigated yet if Na(V)1.1 truncated mutants are dominant negative, if they 
impair expression or function of wild-type channels, as it has been shown for 
truncated mutants of other proteins (e.g., Ca(V) channels). We studied the 
effect of two DS truncated Na(V)1.1 mutants, R222* and R1234*, on coexpressed 
wild-type Na(+) channels.
METHODS: We engineered R222* or R1234* in the human cDNA of Na(V)1.1 (hNa(V)1.1) 
and studied their effect on coexpressed wild-type hNa(V)1.1, hNa(V)1.2 or 
hNa(V)1.3 cotransfecting tsA-201 cells, and on hNa(V)1.6 transfecting an human 
embryonic kidney (HEK) cell line stably expressing this channel. We also studied 
hippocampal neurons dissociated from Na(V)1.1 knockout (KO) mice, an animal 
model of DS expressing a truncated Na(V)1.1 channel.
KEY FINDINGS: We found no modifications of current amplitude coexpressing the 
truncated mutants with hNa(V)1.1, hNa(V)1.2, or hNa(V)1.3, but a 30% reduction 
coexpressing them with hNa(V)1.6. However, we showed that also coexpression of 
functional full-length hNa(V)1.1 caused a similar reduction. Therefore, this 
effect should not be involved in the pathomechanism of DS. Some gating 
properties of hNa(V)1.1, hNa(V)1.3, and hNa(V)1.6 were modified, but recordings 
of hippocampal neurons dissociated from Na(V)1.1 KO mice did not show any 
significant modifications of these properties. Therefore, Na(V)1.1 truncated 
mutants are not dominant negative, consistent with haploinsufficiency as the 
cause of DS.
SIGNIFICANCE: We have better clarified the pathomechanism of DS, pointed out an 
important difference between pathogenic truncated Ca(V)2.1 mutants and hNa(V)1.1 
ones, and shown that hNa(V)1.6 expression can be reduced in physiologic 
conditions by coexpression of hNa(V)1.1. Moreover, our data may provide useful 
information for the development of therapeutic approaches.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. © 2011 International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03346.x
PMID: 22150645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

1IntroductionFebrile seizures (FS) are the most common type of seizures in childhood. However, some febrile‐related epilepsy syndromes often present as fever‐induced seizures as the initial manifestation. These conditions are frequently misdiagnosed as FS due to their overlapping early symptoms. Particularly, in patients with Dravet syndrome (DS), these conditions may mimic complex febrile seizures (CFS) during the 1st year of life [1]. Typical phenotypes gradually emerge after the 2nd year of life, presenting as difficult‐to‐treat seizures accompanied by intellectual disability. Such phenotypes are associated with high epilepsy mortality rates in early childhood (15.84/1000 person‐years) due to status epilepticus and sudden unexpected death from epilepsy [2, 3, 4]. The delay from the first seizure to a definitive diagnosis leads to unnecessary tests and delayed treatments [5]. Therefore, accurate identification of patients with FS at risk of developing epilepsy is crucial for early intervention and optimized prognosis.
SCN1A, which encodes the alpha subunit of the sodium voltage‐gated channel NaV1.1, is the most common pathogenic gene in hereditary epilepsy [6]. Characteristic differences among the pathogenic variants of SCN1A can lead to variable phenotypes, ranging from genetic epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) spectrum to severe phenotypes—including DS and early‐onset developmental and epileptic encephalopathies—with movement disorders associated with gain‐of‐function variants [7, 8, 9]. Protein‐truncating variants causing complete loss of function (LOF) are typically associated with severe phenotypes. Missense variants have varied functional effects, including complete or partial LOF and gain of function, which can lead to phenotypes of different severities [10]. Given the specific distribution patterns of SCN1A variants across protein functional domains, predicting the associated phenotype of novel variants is possible [10]. Regardless of variant type, fever‐induced seizures are typical manifestations of SCN1A variants that cause neuronal hyperexcitability, making SCN1A molecular screening highly valuable for children with FS.Genetic testing is generally recommended for patients with FS who have a clear family history or show significant symptom worsening [11]. However, most disease‐associated SCN1A variants occur de novo, and many patients lack a relevant family history or exhibit incomplete penetrance, leading to delays in diagnosis and intervention until definitive features emerge [11]. Children under 2 years old benefit the most from positive SCN1A testing [12]. As molecular genetic testing advances, costs are expected to decline, making genetic sequencing a routine screening tool during early disease onset. We conducted a nationwide, multicenter genetic screening program for children with FS. Particularly, this study focused on analyzing the diagnostic yield of pathogenic SCN1A variants in 2552 patients with FS, examining their distribution characteristics in this population and exploring the associations between variant type, functional domain location, and clinical phenotype. The aim was to provide clinical guidance for molecular screening in patients with FS and promote early diagnosis, phenotype prediction, and individualized management of SCN1A‐related seizures.

Introduction

Febrile seizures (FS) are the most common type of seizures in childhood. However, some febrile‐related epilepsy syndromes often present as fever‐induced seizures as the initial manifestation. These conditions are frequently misdiagnosed as FS due to their overlapping early symptoms. Particularly, in patients with Dravet syndrome (DS), these conditions may mimic complex febrile seizures (CFS) during the 1st year of life [1]. Typical phenotypes gradually emerge after the 2nd year of life, presenting as difficult‐to‐treat seizures accompanied by intellectual disability. Such phenotypes are associated with high epilepsy mortality rates in early childhood (15.84/1000 person‐years) due to status epilepticus and sudden unexpected death from epilepsy [2, 3, 4]. The delay from the first seizure to a definitive diagnosis leads to unnecessary tests and delayed treatments [5]. Therefore, accurate identification of patients with FS at risk of developing epilepsy is crucial for early intervention and optimized prognosis.

SCN1A, which encodes the alpha subunit of the sodium voltage‐gated channel NaV1.1, is the most common pathogenic gene in hereditary epilepsy [6]. Characteristic differences among the pathogenic variants of SCN1A can lead to variable phenotypes, ranging from genetic epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) spectrum to severe phenotypes—including DS and early‐onset developmental and epileptic encephalopathies—with movement disorders associated with gain‐of‐function variants [7, 8, 9]. Protein‐truncating variants causing complete loss of function (LOF) are typically associated with severe phenotypes. Missense variants have varied functional effects, including complete or partial LOF and gain of function, which can lead to phenotypes of different severities [10]. Given the specific distribution patterns of SCN1A variants across protein functional domains, predicting the associated phenotype of novel variants is possible [10]. Regardless of variant type, fever‐induced seizures are typical manifestations of SCN1A variants that cause neuronal hyperexcitability, making SCN1A molecular screening highly valuable for children with FS.

Genetic testing is generally recommended for patients with FS who have a clear family history or show significant symptom worsening [11]. However, most disease‐associated SCN1A variants occur de novo, and many patients lack a relevant family history or exhibit incomplete penetrance, leading to delays in diagnosis and intervention until definitive features emerge [11]. Children under 2 years old benefit the most from positive SCN1A testing [12]. As molecular genetic testing advances, costs are expected to decline, making genetic sequencing a routine screening tool during early disease onset. We conducted a nationwide, multicenter genetic screening program for children with FS. Particularly, this study focused on analyzing the diagnostic yield of pathogenic SCN1A variants in 2552 patients with FS, examining their distribution characteristics in this population and exploring the associations between variant type, functional domain location, and clinical phenotype. The aim was to provide clinical guidance for molecular screening in patients with FS and promote early diagnosis, phenotype prediction, and individualized management of SCN1A‐related seizures.

2Methods2.1Study DesignFrom March 2019 to February 2023, molecular screening was conducted on 2552 eligible children with FS across 209 hospitals in 30 Chinese administrative regions. Samples were collected in general hospitals, children's hospitals, and maternal and child health hospitals. The inclusion criteria were a diagnosis of FS based on the definition of the International League Against Epilepsy [13], no prior history of afebrile seizures. Eligible participants had no clear alternative diagnosis at the time of enrolment and provided informed consent for gene panel testing. The exclusion criteria were a confirmed epilepsy diagnosis, central nervous system infections, known acquired or genetic etiologies, and incomplete clinical data.This study focused on SCN1A variants identified through gene panel sequencing. Detailed descriptions of the gene panel sequencing procedures and bioinformatic analysis workflow are provided in the Supplementary Methods. Each variant was evaluated for pathogenicity in accordance with the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines [14], incorporating the latest literature on variant pathogenicity and relevant functional studies. Sanger sequencing was used to validate the variants and analyze their parental origins. Clinical phenotype correlation and familial co‐segregation analyses were also performed to identify potential FS‐associated SCN1A variants [15]. Children with pathogenic (P) or likely pathogenic (LP) SCN1A variants, consistent with their phenotypes and modes of inheritance, were considered for diagnostic genetic testing. For patients carrying pathogenic SCN1A variants, referrals were made to the participating neuropediatric departments, the characteristics of SCN1A‐related seizures were thoroughly explained to caregivers, and follow‐up and treatment plans were developed collaboratively. A detailed literature review was also conducted for all SCN1A variants classified as P or LP. Previously reported variants and their associated clinical phenotypes were summarized. By comparing variant types, functional domain locations, and related clinical conditions, this study explored potential correlations between variant characteristics and clinical phenotypes.The program is registered with the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (No. ChiCTR1900022164). This study received approval from the Ethics Committee of the Chinese PLA General Hospital and the ethics boards of the participating hospitals. Written informed consent was obtained from the parents or guardians of all participants.2.2Clinical Assessment and Data CollectionFS was diagnosed according to the International League Against Epilepsy criteria. These define FS as seizures associated with a febrile illness not caused by central nervous system infection, occurring in patients without prior neonatal or afebrile seizures and not meeting criteria for other acute symptomatic attacks [13]. All patients were examined and diagnosed by trained pediatricians. Clinical data were filled in standardized case report forms (CRFs) by clinicians who completed a unified training on data acquisition procedures and CRF completion protocols, ensuring consistency across participating centers. The CRFs captured demographic information, medical history, clinical features, physical examination findings, laboratory and imaging results, treatment details, perinatal history, and family history (involving first‐ and second‐degree relatives). The EEG results of all patients were either normal or showed mild nonspecific abnormalities. Data were entered by trained personnel into a password‐protected multicenter research database hosted on the MyGeno cloud platform (https://cloud.mygeno.cn/), which is managed by a certified third‐party clinical genomics provider. The data were subsequently reviewed by experienced pediatricians for accuracy and completeness. Each participating center had an independent account for data access and management.Based on clinical characteristics, FS was classified into two main types. Simple Febrile Seizures (SFS) are generalized seizures lasting less than 15 min and do not recur within 24 h. SFS occur in children with normal psychomotor development and no history of afebrile seizures [13]. Conversely, CFS are focal, prolonged (> 15 min), recur within 24 h, and are associated with postictal neurological abnormalities or prior neurologic deficits [13]. For statistical analysis, children with a history of febrile status epilepticus, defined as FS lasting more than 30 min or a series of shorter seizures without recovery of consciousness between episodes, were included in the CFS group.The clinical follow‐up data of SCN1A‐positive patients (≥ 12 months after receiving genetic test results) were collected. Information was obtained through medical record review and structured follow‐up interviews conducted by the treating physicians. Follow‐up parameters included seizure recurrence, treatment regimen, phenotypic evolution, and developmental status.2.3Analysis of 
SCN1A
 VariantsMissense and protein‐truncating variants—including nonsense and frameshift variants resulting in premature stop codons, splicing, and large deletions—were included. These variants were integrated using a free online tool (https://wlab.ethz.ch/protter/start/) to facilitate the interpretation of genotype–phenotype associations. Linear protein sequences were aligned using the “PER viewer” (pathogenic variant enriched regions; http://per.broadinstitute.org) and the “SCN viewer” (sodium channel gene family; http://SCN‐viewer.broadinstitute.org) to aid variant analysis and phenotype prediction [16, 17].2.4Statistical AnalysisClinical characteristics are expressed as frequencies and percentages for categorical data, and as medians with interquartile ranges for continuous variables. Comparative analyses were conducted using two‐tailed χ2 test, Fisher's exact test, Mann–Whitney test, and Kruskal–Wallis H test (based on normality assessment using Kolmogorov–Smirnov and Shapiro–Wilk tests). Statistical analyses were performed using IBM SPSS 26. A value of p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

2.1Study DesignFrom March 2019 to February 2023, molecular screening was conducted on 2552 eligible children with FS across 209 hospitals in 30 Chinese administrative regions. Samples were collected in general hospitals, children's hospitals, and maternal and child health hospitals. The inclusion criteria were a diagnosis of FS based on the definition of the International League Against Epilepsy [13], no prior history of afebrile seizures. Eligible participants had no clear alternative diagnosis at the time of enrolment and provided informed consent for gene panel testing. The exclusion criteria were a confirmed epilepsy diagnosis, central nervous system infections, known acquired or genetic etiologies, and incomplete clinical data.This study focused on SCN1A variants identified through gene panel sequencing. Detailed descriptions of the gene panel sequencing procedures and bioinformatic analysis workflow are provided in the Supplementary Methods. Each variant was evaluated for pathogenicity in accordance with the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines [14], incorporating the latest literature on variant pathogenicity and relevant functional studies. Sanger sequencing was used to validate the variants and analyze their parental origins. Clinical phenotype correlation and familial co‐segregation analyses were also performed to identify potential FS‐associated SCN1A variants [15]. Children with pathogenic (P) or likely pathogenic (LP) SCN1A variants, consistent with their phenotypes and modes of inheritance, were considered for diagnostic genetic testing. For patients carrying pathogenic SCN1A variants, referrals were made to the participating neuropediatric departments, the characteristics of SCN1A‐related seizures were thoroughly explained to caregivers, and follow‐up and treatment plans were developed collaboratively. A detailed literature review was also conducted for all SCN1A variants classified as P or LP. Previously reported variants and their associated clinical phenotypes were summarized. By comparing variant types, functional domain locations, and related clinical conditions, this study explored potential correlations between variant characteristics and clinical phenotypes.The program is registered with the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (No. ChiCTR1900022164). This study received approval from the Ethics Committee of the Chinese PLA General Hospital and the ethics boards of the participating hospitals. Written informed consent was obtained from the parents or guardians of all participants.

Study Design

From March 2019 to February 2023, molecular screening was conducted on 2552 eligible children with FS across 209 hospitals in 30 Chinese administrative regions. Samples were collected in general hospitals, children's hospitals, and maternal and child health hospitals. The inclusion criteria were a diagnosis of FS based on the definition of the International League Against Epilepsy [13], no prior history of afebrile seizures. Eligible participants had no clear alternative diagnosis at the time of enrolment and provided informed consent for gene panel testing. The exclusion criteria were a confirmed epilepsy diagnosis, central nervous system infections, known acquired or genetic etiologies, and incomplete clinical data.

This study focused on SCN1A variants identified through gene panel sequencing. Detailed descriptions of the gene panel sequencing procedures and bioinformatic analysis workflow are provided in the Supplementary Methods. Each variant was evaluated for pathogenicity in accordance with the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines [14], incorporating the latest literature on variant pathogenicity and relevant functional studies. Sanger sequencing was used to validate the variants and analyze their parental origins. Clinical phenotype correlation and familial co‐segregation analyses were also performed to identify potential FS‐associated SCN1A variants [15]. Children with pathogenic (P) or likely pathogenic (LP) SCN1A variants, consistent with their phenotypes and modes of inheritance, were considered for diagnostic genetic testing. For patients carrying pathogenic SCN1A variants, referrals were made to the participating neuropediatric departments, the characteristics of SCN1A‐related seizures were thoroughly explained to caregivers, and follow‐up and treatment plans were developed collaboratively. A detailed literature review was also conducted for all SCN1A variants classified as P or LP. Previously reported variants and their associated clinical phenotypes were summarized. By comparing variant types, functional domain locations, and related clinical conditions, this study explored potential correlations between variant characteristics and clinical phenotypes.

The program is registered with the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (No. ChiCTR1900022164). This study received approval from the Ethics Committee of the Chinese PLA General Hospital and the ethics boards of the participating hospitals. Written informed consent was obtained from the parents or guardians of all participants.

2.2Clinical Assessment and Data CollectionFS was diagnosed according to the International League Against Epilepsy criteria. These define FS as seizures associated with a febrile illness not caused by central nervous system infection, occurring in patients without prior neonatal or afebrile seizures and not meeting criteria for other acute symptomatic attacks [13]. All patients were examined and diagnosed by trained pediatricians. Clinical data were filled in standardized case report forms (CRFs) by clinicians who completed a unified training on data acquisition procedures and CRF completion protocols, ensuring consistency across participating centers. The CRFs captured demographic information, medical history, clinical features, physical examination findings, laboratory and imaging results, treatment details, perinatal history, and family history (involving first‐ and second‐degree relatives). The EEG results of all patients were either normal or showed mild nonspecific abnormalities. Data were entered by trained personnel into a password‐protected multicenter research database hosted on the MyGeno cloud platform (https://cloud.mygeno.cn/), which is managed by a certified third‐party clinical genomics provider. The data were subsequently reviewed by experienced pediatricians for accuracy and completeness. Each participating center had an independent account for data access and management.Based on clinical characteristics, FS was classified into two main types. Simple Febrile Seizures (SFS) are generalized seizures lasting less than 15 min and do not recur within 24 h. SFS occur in children with normal psychomotor development and no history of afebrile seizures [13]. Conversely, CFS are focal, prolonged (> 15 min), recur within 24 h, and are associated with postictal neurological abnormalities or prior neurologic deficits [13]. For statistical analysis, children with a history of febrile status epilepticus, defined as FS lasting more than 30 min or a series of shorter seizures without recovery of consciousness between episodes, were included in the CFS group.The clinical follow‐up data of SCN1A‐positive patients (≥ 12 months after receiving genetic test results) were collected. Information was obtained through medical record review and structured follow‐up interviews conducted by the treating physicians. Follow‐up parameters included seizure recurrence, treatment regimen, phenotypic evolution, and developmental status.

Clinical Assessment and Data Collection

FS was diagnosed according to the International League Against Epilepsy criteria. These define FS as seizures associated with a febrile illness not caused by central nervous system infection, occurring in patients without prior neonatal or afebrile seizures and not meeting criteria for other acute symptomatic attacks [13]. All patients were examined and diagnosed by trained pediatricians. Clinical data were filled in standardized case report forms (CRFs) by clinicians who completed a unified training on data acquisition procedures and CRF completion protocols, ensuring consistency across participating centers. The CRFs captured demographic information, medical history, clinical features, physical examination findings, laboratory and imaging results, treatment details, perinatal history, and family history (involving first‐ and second‐degree relatives). The EEG results of all patients were either normal or showed mild nonspecific abnormalities. Data were entered by trained personnel into a password‐protected multicenter research database hosted on the MyGeno cloud platform (https://cloud.mygeno.cn/), which is managed by a certified third‐party clinical genomics provider. The data were subsequently reviewed by experienced pediatricians for accuracy and completeness. Each participating center had an independent account for data access and management.

Based on clinical characteristics, FS was classified into two main types. Simple Febrile Seizures (SFS) are generalized seizures lasting less than 15 min and do not recur within 24 h. SFS occur in children with normal psychomotor development and no history of afebrile seizures [13]. Conversely, CFS are focal, prolonged (> 15 min), recur within 24 h, and are associated with postictal neurological abnormalities or prior neurologic deficits [13]. For statistical analysis, children with a history of febrile status epilepticus, defined as FS lasting more than 30 min or a series of shorter seizures without recovery of consciousness between episodes, were included in the CFS group.

The clinical follow‐up data of SCN1A‐positive patients (≥ 12 months after receiving genetic test results) were collected. Information was obtained through medical record review and structured follow‐up interviews conducted by the treating physicians. Follow‐up parameters included seizure recurrence, treatment regimen, phenotypic evolution, and developmental status.

2.3Analysis of 
SCN1A
 VariantsMissense and protein‐truncating variants—including nonsense and frameshift variants resulting in premature stop codons, splicing, and large deletions—were included. These variants were integrated using a free online tool (https://wlab.ethz.ch/protter/start/) to facilitate the interpretation of genotype–phenotype associations. Linear protein sequences were aligned using the “PER viewer” (pathogenic variant enriched regions; http://per.broadinstitute.org) and the “SCN viewer” (sodium channel gene family; http://SCN‐viewer.broadinstitute.org) to aid variant analysis and phenotype prediction [16, 17].

Analysis of 
SCN1A
 Variants

Missense and protein‐truncating variants—including nonsense and frameshift variants resulting in premature stop codons, splicing, and large deletions—were included. These variants were integrated using a free online tool (https://wlab.ethz.ch/protter/start/) to facilitate the interpretation of genotype–phenotype associations. Linear protein sequences were aligned using the “PER viewer” (pathogenic variant enriched regions; http://per.broadinstitute.org) and the “SCN viewer” (sodium channel gene family; http://SCN‐viewer.broadinstitute.org) to aid variant analysis and phenotype prediction [16, 17].

2.4Statistical AnalysisClinical characteristics are expressed as frequencies and percentages for categorical data, and as medians with interquartile ranges for continuous variables. Comparative analyses were conducted using two‐tailed χ2 test, Fisher's exact test, Mann–Whitney test, and Kruskal–Wallis H test (based on normality assessment using Kolmogorov–Smirnov and Shapiro–Wilk tests). Statistical analyses were performed using IBM SPSS 26. A value of p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Statistical Analysis

Clinical characteristics are expressed as frequencies and percentages for categorical data, and as medians with interquartile ranges for continuous variables. Comparative analyses were conducted using two‐tailed χ2 test, Fisher's exact test, Mann–Whitney test, and Kruskal–Wallis H test (based on normality assessment using Kolmogorov–Smirnov and Shapiro–Wilk tests). Statistical analyses were performed using IBM SPSS 26. A value of p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

3Results3.1Diagnosis Yield and Clinical CharacteristicsFrom our national multicenter cohort of 2552 children meeting the FS diagnostic criteria, 203 were found to have SCN1A variants (Figure 1). A total of 141 (5.5%, 141/2552) carried SCN1A variants classified as P or LP according to ACMG guidelines (Table S1). Among these variants, 26 initially categorized as variants of uncertain significance were reclassified through genetic re‐evaluations, comprehensive phenotypic correlations, and family segregation analysis.FIGURE 1Study flow and screening results of panel testing conducted on 2552 children with FS. LP = likely pathogenic; P = pathogenic; VUS = variant of uncertain significance.Six of the 141 patients with diagnostic SCN1A variants underwent genetic testing following their first FS episode, whereas the remaining patients were tested after they had experienced two or more episodes. In addition, seven patients experienced status epilepticus. The median age at seizure onset was 10 months (range, 2–60 months; IQR = 8–17). Among the 141 children, 46 (32.6%) and 95 (63.4%) were initially clinically diagnosed with SFS and CFS, respectively. The detection rate of pathogenic SCN1A variants in the CFS group was significantly higher (6.8% [95/1389]; χ2 = 10.088; df = 1; p = 0.001) than that in the SFS group (4.0% [46/1163]). Additionally, the age at seizure onset was significantly earlier for SCN1A‐positive children with CFS (median = 9 months, IQR = 8–14) than for those with SFS (median = 12 months, IQR = 8–20; p = 0.028).Among the 141 children, 52 (36.9%, 52/141) had a positive family history of FS or epilepsy in first‐ or second‐degree relatives, whereas 89 (63.1%, 89/141) had no such history (Table 1). No significant difference in the detection rate of pathogenic SCN1A variants was observed between children with a family history (5.0% [52/1043]) and those without (5.9% [89/1509]; χ2 = 0.983; df = 1; p = 0.321).TABLE 1Diagnostic SCN1A variants versus no SCN1A variants.CategoryTotal (n = 2552)Diagnostic SCN1A variants (n = 141)No SCN1A variants (n = 2411)χ2
df
p

Sex
0.70010.403Male1658 (65.0%)87 (61.7%)1571 (65.2%)Female894 (35.0%)54 (38.3%)840 (34.8%)
Age at seizure onset, months
12 (8–22)10 (8–17)18 (12–24)——
< 0.0001

Type of FS
10.0881
0.001
SFS1163 (45.6%)46/1163 (4.0%)1117/1163 (96.0%)CFS1389 (54.4%)95/1389 (6.8%)1294/1389 (93.2%)
Family history of seizures (first‐degree or second‐degree relative)
1043 (40.9%)52/1043 (5.0%)991/1043 (95.0%)0.98310.321
Note: Data are presented as n (%) or median (IQR). p value were determined using a two‐tailed chi‐square test or Mann–Whitney test. Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05.Among the 141 SCN1A variants, 53 were novel and 88 were previously reported. Of the 88 variants, 48 were associated with DS. Overall, 12 children in the SFS group (46.2%, [12/26]) and 36 in the CFS group (58.1%, [36/62]) had SCN1A variants associated with DS. Further analysis revealed no significant difference in the proportion of DS‐associated variants between the two subgroups (χ2 = 1.048; df = 1; p = 0.306).3.2Variant Types and DistributionMissense variants accounted for the largest proportion (76.5%, 108/141) of the diagnostic SCN1A variants. The remaining 33 were protein‐truncating variants (15 nonsense, 9 frameshift, 6 splicing, 2 large deletion, and 1 in‐frame). Protein‐truncating variants, which lead to complete LOF, are typically associated with severe phenotypes [18]. Among the 33 patients with truncating variants, 12 (36.4%) were initially diagnosed with SFS.No significant differences were observed in the detection rates of missense or truncating mutations between the SFS and CFS groups (χ2 = 1.048; df = 1; p = 0.306). Additionally, children with truncating variants had a significantly earlier age of seizure onset (median = 7 months, IQR = 6–8) than those with missense variants (median = 11 months, IQR = 8–18; p < 0.0001).A 2D illustration shows the distribution of these missense variants across the SCN1A protein structure (Figure 2A). The missense variants primarily occurred in the homologous domains D1–D4of the SCN1‐alpha subunit, with only a few variants occurring in the cytoplasmic regions. All five variants found on the cytoplasmic side (D1‐D2 and D2‐D3 linker regions) were associated with the CFS phenotype. No missense variants were found in the non‐conserved N‐terminal and C‐terminal regions. Truncating mutations were evenly distributed throughout the gene (Table S1).FIGURE 2Consistency analysis of domain distribution between missense variants identified in SFS/CFS patients and the reported variants with known phenotypes. (A) The location of SCN1A missense variants with SFS or CFS are displayed as different colored dots. (B) The location of SCN1A missense variants with mild or severe phenotypes are displayed as different colored dots.3.3Consistency of SCN1A Missense Variant Distribution With Initial Clinical Diagnoses and Established Phenotypic SeverityThe risk of subsequent epilepsy has long been a major concern in children with FS. To evaluate the potential of the initial clinical classification (SFS vs. CFS) indicating long‐term risk and to explore whether molecular diagnosis can provide additional predictive value, we assessed the consistency between initial clinical diagnoses (SFS vs. CFS) and the established phenotypic severity of the corresponding variants, as reported in the literature. Among the 141 SCN1A variants identified, 53 (37.6%) were novel, complicating early phenotype prediction, particularly for missense variants. Therefore, we performed a visual analysis focusing on missense variants to characterize their distribution and potential clinical relevance.First, we assessed whether the variant distribution differed between initial clinical diagnoses (SFS vs. CFS) using all the detected missense variants (Figure 2A). No significant difference was observed between the two groups (χ2 = 15.81; df = 11; p = 0.148).Second, given the variability in follow‐up duration and the loss to follow‐up, not all individuals had fully manifested their final phenotypes. Therefore, relying solely on follow‐up diagnoses could introduce uncertainties into genotype–phenotype associations. To mitigate this uncertainty, we specifically analyzed the subset of missense variants that were previously reported (66 of the 108 missense variants identified). Among these, 28 were associated with mild phenotypes (including FS, FS+, and GEFS+) and 38 were associated with severe phenotypes (including DS and intractable epilepsy). In contrast to their relatively uniform distribution in the initial clinical diagnosis groups (SFS vs. CFS), the missense variants associated with severe phenotypes were significantly more enriched in the pore‐forming regions (78.6%, 22/38) than those associated with mild phenotypes (25.0%, 7/28; χ2 = 7.082; df = 1; p = 0.008; Figure 2B).To further validate the relevance of variant distribution, we calculated variant density across different functional regions (Figure 3A and Table S2) using the method described by Gallagher et al., which adjusts for differences in coding region lengths to identify variant‐dense or variant‐sparse regions [19]. Variant‐dense regions covered important functional domains, including S4 (voltage sensor), S4–5, S5–6 linker (pore‐loop regions), D3–D4 (fast inactivation gate), and the conserved C‐terminus. Variant‐sparse regions included D1–D2 and D2–D3 linkers, and the remaining regions (conserved N‐terminus, S1–3, S3–4, S5, and S6) were classified as intermediate regions.FIGURE 3Variant density and age at seizure onset by functional domains. (A) Bar chart displaying the missense variant frequency ratio associated with each functional domain of the gene. The variant frequency across the whole protein was assigned a value of 1, as shown by the bar labeled SCN1A on the left. Regions were labeled “intermediate” if the ratio was valued at 0.5–1.5, “variant dense” if the ratio was > 1.5, and “variant sparse” if the ratio was < 0.5. (B) Bar chart displaying the median seizure onset associated with each functional region. Pore region include S5, S5‐6, and S6.We further evaluated whether the distribution of missense variants across different variant density regions differed between the SFS and CFS groups. No statistically significant differences were found in variant density distribution between these two groups (χ2 = 3.657; df = 2; p = 0.161). However, for previously reported missense variants, the variant‐sparse regions exclusively corresponded to mild phenotypes (3/3, 100%), and the variant‐dense regions predominantly corresponded to severe phenotypes (30/44, 68.2%). This association was statistically significant (two‐tailed Fisher exact test, p = 0.042).Next, we investigated the relationship between the functional regions affected by missense variants and age at seizure onset. No significant differences were observed between the three density groups (p = 0.828, Figure 3B). However, regardless of variant density, patients with missense variants in the pore‐forming regions (S5, S5–6 linker, and S6) had a significantly earlier age of seizure onset (median = 10 months; IQR = 8–13) than those with variants located outside the pore regions (median = 12 months, IQR = 9–19, p = 0.036).Figure 4 summarizes the transition from the initial clinical diagnosis of FS to the molecular diagnosis of SCN1A‐related seizures, showing the phenotype predictions of novel variants, the distribution of previously reported variants across different clinical diagnosis groups, and their implications for potential genetic risks.FIGURE 4The molecular diagnostic pathway and variant characteristics of SCN1A‐related seizures. Children with pathogenic SCN1A variants were considered to have a positive diagnosis. The number of reported variants associated with different disease phenotypes across clinical phenotype subgroups was identified to indicate potential genetic risks. The distribution pattern of novel variants was analyzed to predict the likely phenotype. The phenotype of SCN1A‐related seizure spectrum from mild to severe is indicated by red arrows. The blue dashed box represents milder phenotypes. The red dashed box represents more severe phenotypes. The red and blue dashed boxes represent a mixture of phenotypes with different degrees of severity.3.4Clinical OutcomesThe critical clinical significance of identifying pathogenic SCN1A variants in children with FS lies in detecting high‐risk individuals, enhancing clinical monitoring, and enabling early recognition of emerging afebrile seizures. Based on the observed genotype–phenotype correlations, a follow‐up strategy involving an integrated risk assessment that incorporates variant type, affected protein domain, and clinical presentation was developed. Among the 141 children with pathogenic SCN1A variants, 106 (75.2%) completed clinical follow‐up over 1–3 years, while 35 (24.8%) were lost to follow‐up (Table S1). To assess potential attrition bias, baseline characteristics were compared between children who completed follow‐up and those who were lost to follow‐up. No significant differences were observed in age at seizure onset (median 9 vs. 10 months, p = 0.087), SCN1A variant type (missense vs. truncating; χ2 = 0.008; df = 1; p = 0.93), or initial FS classification (SFS vs. CFS; χ2 = 0.030; df = 1; p = 0.862), suggesting that loss to follow‐up unlikely introduced major systematic bias.Among the 106 patients with complete follow‐up data, FS progressed to DS in 33 (31.1%), whereas it remained GEFS+, FS+, and FS in 45 (42.5%), 14 (13.2%), and 14 (13.2%), respectively, within the follow‐up period. Among individuals whose condition progressed to DS, 20 had truncating variants and 13 had missense variants—10 located in the pore‐loop region, 2 in the conserved C‐terminal region, and 1 in the S1‐S3 segments (Figure S1).Neurodevelopmental comorbidities included sleep disorders (n = 1), social difficulties (n = 1), attention deficit hyperactivity disorders (n = 4), learning disabilities (n = 4), and irritability (n = 5). All patients with DS showed some degree of intellectual disability.The treatment responses of the 106 patients with complete follow‐up data were classified according to medication use and seizure control.Seven patients (6.6%) remained seizure‐free throughout follow‐up without receiving antiepileptic medications.Intermittent prophylaxis (levetiracetam, diazepam, or antipyretics) was given to 21 patients (19.8%) during febrile episodes. Among them, 5 remained seizure‐free after the prophylaxis was discontinued, 2 experienced seizures only during febrile episodes without prophylaxis, and 14 continued to have FS despite preventive treatment. However, no further adjustments were made due to the low frequency of seizures.Continuous antiepileptic therapy was administered to 78 patients (73.6%). Among them, 37 achieved complete seizure control, including 7 who transitioned from intermittent to continuous treatment. Another 38 patients experienced reduced seizure frequency without achieving full control, and 3 showed poor treatment response, possibly reflecting drug resistance or disease progression.

3.1Diagnosis Yield and Clinical CharacteristicsFrom our national multicenter cohort of 2552 children meeting the FS diagnostic criteria, 203 were found to have SCN1A variants (Figure 1). A total of 141 (5.5%, 141/2552) carried SCN1A variants classified as P or LP according to ACMG guidelines (Table S1). Among these variants, 26 initially categorized as variants of uncertain significance were reclassified through genetic re‐evaluations, comprehensive phenotypic correlations, and family segregation analysis.FIGURE 1Study flow and screening results of panel testing conducted on 2552 children with FS. LP = likely pathogenic; P = pathogenic; VUS = variant of uncertain significance.Six of the 141 patients with diagnostic SCN1A variants underwent genetic testing following their first FS episode, whereas the remaining patients were tested after they had experienced two or more episodes. In addition, seven patients experienced status epilepticus. The median age at seizure onset was 10 months (range, 2–60 months; IQR = 8–17). Among the 141 children, 46 (32.6%) and 95 (63.4%) were initially clinically diagnosed with SFS and CFS, respectively. The detection rate of pathogenic SCN1A variants in the CFS group was significantly higher (6.8% [95/1389]; χ2 = 10.088; df = 1; p = 0.001) than that in the SFS group (4.0% [46/1163]). Additionally, the age at seizure onset was significantly earlier for SCN1A‐positive children with CFS (median = 9 months, IQR = 8–14) than for those with SFS (median = 12 months, IQR = 8–20; p = 0.028).Among the 141 children, 52 (36.9%, 52/141) had a positive family history of FS or epilepsy in first‐ or second‐degree relatives, whereas 89 (63.1%, 89/141) had no such history (Table 1). No significant difference in the detection rate of pathogenic SCN1A variants was observed between children with a family history (5.0% [52/1043]) and those without (5.9% [89/1509]; χ2 = 0.983; df = 1; p = 0.321).TABLE 1Diagnostic SCN1A variants versus no SCN1A variants.CategoryTotal (n = 2552)Diagnostic SCN1A variants (n = 141)No SCN1A variants (n = 2411)χ2
df
p

Sex
0.70010.403Male1658 (65.0%)87 (61.7%)1571 (65.2%)Female894 (35.0%)54 (38.3%)840 (34.8%)
Age at seizure onset, months
12 (8–22)10 (8–17)18 (12–24)——
< 0.0001

Type of FS
10.0881
0.001
SFS1163 (45.6%)46/1163 (4.0%)1117/1163 (96.0%)CFS1389 (54.4%)95/1389 (6.8%)1294/1389 (93.2%)
Family history of seizures (first‐degree or second‐degree relative)
1043 (40.9%)52/1043 (5.0%)991/1043 (95.0%)0.98310.321
Note: Data are presented as n (%) or median (IQR). p value were determined using a two‐tailed chi‐square test or Mann–Whitney test. Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05.Among the 141 SCN1A variants, 53 were novel and 88 were previously reported. Of the 88 variants, 48 were associated with DS. Overall, 12 children in the SFS group (46.2%, [12/26]) and 36 in the CFS group (58.1%, [36/62]) had SCN1A variants associated with DS. Further analysis revealed no significant difference in the proportion of DS‐associated variants between the two subgroups (χ2 = 1.048; df = 1; p = 0.306).

Diagnosis Yield and Clinical Characteristics

From our national multicenter cohort of 2552 children meeting the FS diagnostic criteria, 203 were found to have SCN1A variants (Figure 1). A total of 141 (5.5%, 141/2552) carried SCN1A variants classified as P or LP according to ACMG guidelines (Table S1). Among these variants, 26 initially categorized as variants of uncertain significance were reclassified through genetic re‐evaluations, comprehensive phenotypic correlations, and family segregation analysis.

Study flow and screening results of panel testing conducted on 2552 children with FS. LP = likely pathogenic; P = pathogenic; VUS = variant of uncertain significance.

Six of the 141 patients with diagnostic SCN1A variants underwent genetic testing following their first FS episode, whereas the remaining patients were tested after they had experienced two or more episodes. In addition, seven patients experienced status epilepticus. The median age at seizure onset was 10 months (range, 2–60 months; IQR = 8–17). Among the 141 children, 46 (32.6%) and 95 (63.4%) were initially clinically diagnosed with SFS and CFS, respectively. The detection rate of pathogenic SCN1A variants in the CFS group was significantly higher (6.8% [95/1389]; χ2 = 10.088; df = 1; p = 0.001) than that in the SFS group (4.0% [46/1163]). Additionally, the age at seizure onset was significantly earlier for SCN1A‐positive children with CFS (median = 9 months, IQR = 8–14) than for those with SFS (median = 12 months, IQR = 8–20; p = 0.028).

Among the 141 children, 52 (36.9%, 52/141) had a positive family history of FS or epilepsy in first‐ or second‐degree relatives, whereas 89 (63.1%, 89/141) had no such history (Table 1). No significant difference in the detection rate of pathogenic SCN1A variants was observed between children with a family history (5.0% [52/1043]) and those without (5.9% [89/1509]; χ2 = 0.983; df = 1; p = 0.321).

Diagnostic SCN1A variants versus no SCN1A variants.

Note: Data are presented as n (%) or median (IQR). p value were determined using a two‐tailed chi‐square test or Mann–Whitney test. Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05.

Among the 141 SCN1A variants, 53 were novel and 88 were previously reported. Of the 88 variants, 48 were associated with DS. Overall, 12 children in the SFS group (46.2%, [12/26]) and 36 in the CFS group (58.1%, [36/62]) had SCN1A variants associated with DS. Further analysis revealed no significant difference in the proportion of DS‐associated variants between the two subgroups (χ2 = 1.048; df = 1; p = 0.306).

3.2Variant Types and DistributionMissense variants accounted for the largest proportion (76.5%, 108/141) of the diagnostic SCN1A variants. The remaining 33 were protein‐truncating variants (15 nonsense, 9 frameshift, 6 splicing, 2 large deletion, and 1 in‐frame). Protein‐truncating variants, which lead to complete LOF, are typically associated with severe phenotypes [18]. Among the 33 patients with truncating variants, 12 (36.4%) were initially diagnosed with SFS.No significant differences were observed in the detection rates of missense or truncating mutations between the SFS and CFS groups (χ2 = 1.048; df = 1; p = 0.306). Additionally, children with truncating variants had a significantly earlier age of seizure onset (median = 7 months, IQR = 6–8) than those with missense variants (median = 11 months, IQR = 8–18; p < 0.0001).A 2D illustration shows the distribution of these missense variants across the SCN1A protein structure (Figure 2A). The missense variants primarily occurred in the homologous domains D1–D4of the SCN1‐alpha subunit, with only a few variants occurring in the cytoplasmic regions. All five variants found on the cytoplasmic side (D1‐D2 and D2‐D3 linker regions) were associated with the CFS phenotype. No missense variants were found in the non‐conserved N‐terminal and C‐terminal regions. Truncating mutations were evenly distributed throughout the gene (Table S1).FIGURE 2Consistency analysis of domain distribution between missense variants identified in SFS/CFS patients and the reported variants with known phenotypes. (A) The location of SCN1A missense variants with SFS or CFS are displayed as different colored dots. (B) The location of SCN1A missense variants with mild or severe phenotypes are displayed as different colored dots.

Variant Types and Distribution

Missense variants accounted for the largest proportion (76.5%, 108/141) of the diagnostic SCN1A variants. The remaining 33 were protein‐truncating variants (15 nonsense, 9 frameshift, 6 splicing, 2 large deletion, and 1 in‐frame). Protein‐truncating variants, which lead to complete LOF, are typically associated with severe phenotypes [18]. Among the 33 patients with truncating variants, 12 (36.4%) were initially diagnosed with SFS.

No significant differences were observed in the detection rates of missense or truncating mutations between the SFS and CFS groups (χ2 = 1.048; df = 1; p = 0.306). Additionally, children with truncating variants had a significantly earlier age of seizure onset (median = 7 months, IQR = 6–8) than those with missense variants (median = 11 months, IQR = 8–18; p < 0.0001).

A 2D illustration shows the distribution of these missense variants across the SCN1A protein structure (Figure 2A). The missense variants primarily occurred in the homologous domains D1–D4of the SCN1‐alpha subunit, with only a few variants occurring in the cytoplasmic regions. All five variants found on the cytoplasmic side (D1‐D2 and D2‐D3 linker regions) were associated with the CFS phenotype. No missense variants were found in the non‐conserved N‐terminal and C‐terminal regions. Truncating mutations were evenly distributed throughout the gene (Table S1).

Consistency analysis of domain distribution between missense variants identified in SFS/CFS patients and the reported variants with known phenotypes. (A) The location of SCN1A missense variants with SFS or CFS are displayed as different colored dots. (B) The location of SCN1A missense variants with mild or severe phenotypes are displayed as different colored dots.

3.3Consistency of SCN1A Missense Variant Distribution With Initial Clinical Diagnoses and Established Phenotypic SeverityThe risk of subsequent epilepsy has long been a major concern in children with FS. To evaluate the potential of the initial clinical classification (SFS vs. CFS) indicating long‐term risk and to explore whether molecular diagnosis can provide additional predictive value, we assessed the consistency between initial clinical diagnoses (SFS vs. CFS) and the established phenotypic severity of the corresponding variants, as reported in the literature. Among the 141 SCN1A variants identified, 53 (37.6%) were novel, complicating early phenotype prediction, particularly for missense variants. Therefore, we performed a visual analysis focusing on missense variants to characterize their distribution and potential clinical relevance.First, we assessed whether the variant distribution differed between initial clinical diagnoses (SFS vs. CFS) using all the detected missense variants (Figure 2A). No significant difference was observed between the two groups (χ2 = 15.81; df = 11; p = 0.148).Second, given the variability in follow‐up duration and the loss to follow‐up, not all individuals had fully manifested their final phenotypes. Therefore, relying solely on follow‐up diagnoses could introduce uncertainties into genotype–phenotype associations. To mitigate this uncertainty, we specifically analyzed the subset of missense variants that were previously reported (66 of the 108 missense variants identified). Among these, 28 were associated with mild phenotypes (including FS, FS+, and GEFS+) and 38 were associated with severe phenotypes (including DS and intractable epilepsy). In contrast to their relatively uniform distribution in the initial clinical diagnosis groups (SFS vs. CFS), the missense variants associated with severe phenotypes were significantly more enriched in the pore‐forming regions (78.6%, 22/38) than those associated with mild phenotypes (25.0%, 7/28; χ2 = 7.082; df = 1; p = 0.008; Figure 2B).To further validate the relevance of variant distribution, we calculated variant density across different functional regions (Figure 3A and Table S2) using the method described by Gallagher et al., which adjusts for differences in coding region lengths to identify variant‐dense or variant‐sparse regions [19]. Variant‐dense regions covered important functional domains, including S4 (voltage sensor), S4–5, S5–6 linker (pore‐loop regions), D3–D4 (fast inactivation gate), and the conserved C‐terminus. Variant‐sparse regions included D1–D2 and D2–D3 linkers, and the remaining regions (conserved N‐terminus, S1–3, S3–4, S5, and S6) were classified as intermediate regions.FIGURE 3Variant density and age at seizure onset by functional domains. (A) Bar chart displaying the missense variant frequency ratio associated with each functional domain of the gene. The variant frequency across the whole protein was assigned a value of 1, as shown by the bar labeled SCN1A on the left. Regions were labeled “intermediate” if the ratio was valued at 0.5–1.5, “variant dense” if the ratio was > 1.5, and “variant sparse” if the ratio was < 0.5. (B) Bar chart displaying the median seizure onset associated with each functional region. Pore region include S5, S5‐6, and S6.We further evaluated whether the distribution of missense variants across different variant density regions differed between the SFS and CFS groups. No statistically significant differences were found in variant density distribution between these two groups (χ2 = 3.657; df = 2; p = 0.161). However, for previously reported missense variants, the variant‐sparse regions exclusively corresponded to mild phenotypes (3/3, 100%), and the variant‐dense regions predominantly corresponded to severe phenotypes (30/44, 68.2%). This association was statistically significant (two‐tailed Fisher exact test, p = 0.042).Next, we investigated the relationship between the functional regions affected by missense variants and age at seizure onset. No significant differences were observed between the three density groups (p = 0.828, Figure 3B). However, regardless of variant density, patients with missense variants in the pore‐forming regions (S5, S5–6 linker, and S6) had a significantly earlier age of seizure onset (median = 10 months; IQR = 8–13) than those with variants located outside the pore regions (median = 12 months, IQR = 9–19, p = 0.036).Figure 4 summarizes the transition from the initial clinical diagnosis of FS to the molecular diagnosis of SCN1A‐related seizures, showing the phenotype predictions of novel variants, the distribution of previously reported variants across different clinical diagnosis groups, and their implications for potential genetic risks.FIGURE 4The molecular diagnostic pathway and variant characteristics of SCN1A‐related seizures. Children with pathogenic SCN1A variants were considered to have a positive diagnosis. The number of reported variants associated with different disease phenotypes across clinical phenotype subgroups was identified to indicate potential genetic risks. The distribution pattern of novel variants was analyzed to predict the likely phenotype. The phenotype of SCN1A‐related seizure spectrum from mild to severe is indicated by red arrows. The blue dashed box represents milder phenotypes. The red dashed box represents more severe phenotypes. The red and blue dashed boxes represent a mixture of phenotypes with different degrees of severity.

Consistency of SCN1A Missense Variant Distribution With Initial Clinical Diagnoses and Established Phenotypic Severity

The risk of subsequent epilepsy has long been a major concern in children with FS. To evaluate the potential of the initial clinical classification (SFS vs. CFS) indicating long‐term risk and to explore whether molecular diagnosis can provide additional predictive value, we assessed the consistency between initial clinical diagnoses (SFS vs. CFS) and the established phenotypic severity of the corresponding variants, as reported in the literature. Among the 141 SCN1A variants identified, 53 (37.6%) were novel, complicating early phenotype prediction, particularly for missense variants. Therefore, we performed a visual analysis focusing on missense variants to characterize their distribution and potential clinical relevance.

First, we assessed whether the variant distribution differed between initial clinical diagnoses (SFS vs. CFS) using all the detected missense variants (Figure 2A). No significant difference was observed between the two groups (χ2 = 15.81; df = 11; p = 0.148).

Second, given the variability in follow‐up duration and the loss to follow‐up, not all individuals had fully manifested their final phenotypes. Therefore, relying solely on follow‐up diagnoses could introduce uncertainties into genotype–phenotype associations. To mitigate this uncertainty, we specifically analyzed the subset of missense variants that were previously reported (66 of the 108 missense variants identified). Among these, 28 were associated with mild phenotypes (including FS, FS+, and GEFS+) and 38 were associated with severe phenotypes (including DS and intractable epilepsy). In contrast to their relatively uniform distribution in the initial clinical diagnosis groups (SFS vs. CFS), the missense variants associated with severe phenotypes were significantly more enriched in the pore‐forming regions (78.6%, 22/38) than those associated with mild phenotypes (25.0%, 7/28; χ2 = 7.082; df = 1; p = 0.008; Figure 2B).

To further validate the relevance of variant distribution, we calculated variant density across different functional regions (Figure 3A and Table S2) using the method described by Gallagher et al., which adjusts for differences in coding region lengths to identify variant‐dense or variant‐sparse regions [19]. Variant‐dense regions covered important functional domains, including S4 (voltage sensor), S4–5, S5–6 linker (pore‐loop regions), D3–D4 (fast inactivation gate), and the conserved C‐terminus. Variant‐sparse regions included D1–D2 and D2–D3 linkers, and the remaining regions (conserved N‐terminus, S1–3, S3–4, S5, and S6) were classified as intermediate regions.

Variant density and age at seizure onset by functional domains. (A) Bar chart displaying the missense variant frequency ratio associated with each functional domain of the gene. The variant frequency across the whole protein was assigned a value of 1, as shown by the bar labeled SCN1A on the left. Regions were labeled “intermediate” if the ratio was valued at 0.5–1.5, “variant dense” if the ratio was > 1.5, and “variant sparse” if the ratio was < 0.5. (B) Bar chart displaying the median seizure onset associated with each functional region. Pore region include S5, S5‐6, and S6.

We further evaluated whether the distribution of missense variants across different variant density regions differed between the SFS and CFS groups. No statistically significant differences were found in variant density distribution between these two groups (χ2 = 3.657; df = 2; p = 0.161). However, for previously reported missense variants, the variant‐sparse regions exclusively corresponded to mild phenotypes (3/3, 100%), and the variant‐dense regions predominantly corresponded to severe phenotypes (30/44, 68.2%). This association was statistically significant (two‐tailed Fisher exact test, p = 0.042).

Next, we investigated the relationship between the functional regions affected by missense variants and age at seizure onset. No significant differences were observed between the three density groups (p = 0.828, Figure 3B). However, regardless of variant density, patients with missense variants in the pore‐forming regions (S5, S5–6 linker, and S6) had a significantly earlier age of seizure onset (median = 10 months; IQR = 8–13) than those with variants located outside the pore regions (median = 12 months, IQR = 9–19, p = 0.036).

Figure 4 summarizes the transition from the initial clinical diagnosis of FS to the molecular diagnosis of SCN1A‐related seizures, showing the phenotype predictions of novel variants, the distribution of previously reported variants across different clinical diagnosis groups, and their implications for potential genetic risks.

The molecular diagnostic pathway and variant characteristics of SCN1A‐related seizures. Children with pathogenic SCN1A variants were considered to have a positive diagnosis. The number of reported variants associated with different disease phenotypes across clinical phenotype subgroups was identified to indicate potential genetic risks. The distribution pattern of novel variants was analyzed to predict the likely phenotype. The phenotype of SCN1A‐related seizure spectrum from mild to severe is indicated by red arrows. The blue dashed box represents milder phenotypes. The red dashed box represents more severe phenotypes. The red and blue dashed boxes represent a mixture of phenotypes with different degrees of severity.

3.4Clinical OutcomesThe critical clinical significance of identifying pathogenic SCN1A variants in children with FS lies in detecting high‐risk individuals, enhancing clinical monitoring, and enabling early recognition of emerging afebrile seizures. Based on the observed genotype–phenotype correlations, a follow‐up strategy involving an integrated risk assessment that incorporates variant type, affected protein domain, and clinical presentation was developed. Among the 141 children with pathogenic SCN1A variants, 106 (75.2%) completed clinical follow‐up over 1–3 years, while 35 (24.8%) were lost to follow‐up (Table S1). To assess potential attrition bias, baseline characteristics were compared between children who completed follow‐up and those who were lost to follow‐up. No significant differences were observed in age at seizure onset (median 9 vs. 10 months, p = 0.087), SCN1A variant type (missense vs. truncating; χ2 = 0.008; df = 1; p = 0.93), or initial FS classification (SFS vs. CFS; χ2 = 0.030; df = 1; p = 0.862), suggesting that loss to follow‐up unlikely introduced major systematic bias.Among the 106 patients with complete follow‐up data, FS progressed to DS in 33 (31.1%), whereas it remained GEFS+, FS+, and FS in 45 (42.5%), 14 (13.2%), and 14 (13.2%), respectively, within the follow‐up period. Among individuals whose condition progressed to DS, 20 had truncating variants and 13 had missense variants—10 located in the pore‐loop region, 2 in the conserved C‐terminal region, and 1 in the S1‐S3 segments (Figure S1).Neurodevelopmental comorbidities included sleep disorders (n = 1), social difficulties (n = 1), attention deficit hyperactivity disorders (n = 4), learning disabilities (n = 4), and irritability (n = 5). All patients with DS showed some degree of intellectual disability.The treatment responses of the 106 patients with complete follow‐up data were classified according to medication use and seizure control.Seven patients (6.6%) remained seizure‐free throughout follow‐up without receiving antiepileptic medications.Intermittent prophylaxis (levetiracetam, diazepam, or antipyretics) was given to 21 patients (19.8%) during febrile episodes. Among them, 5 remained seizure‐free after the prophylaxis was discontinued, 2 experienced seizures only during febrile episodes without prophylaxis, and 14 continued to have FS despite preventive treatment. However, no further adjustments were made due to the low frequency of seizures.Continuous antiepileptic therapy was administered to 78 patients (73.6%). Among them, 37 achieved complete seizure control, including 7 who transitioned from intermittent to continuous treatment. Another 38 patients experienced reduced seizure frequency without achieving full control, and 3 showed poor treatment response, possibly reflecting drug resistance or disease progression.

Clinical Outcomes

The critical clinical significance of identifying pathogenic SCN1A variants in children with FS lies in detecting high‐risk individuals, enhancing clinical monitoring, and enabling early recognition of emerging afebrile seizures. Based on the observed genotype–phenotype correlations, a follow‐up strategy involving an integrated risk assessment that incorporates variant type, affected protein domain, and clinical presentation was developed. Among the 141 children with pathogenic SCN1A variants, 106 (75.2%) completed clinical follow‐up over 1–3 years, while 35 (24.8%) were lost to follow‐up (Table S1). To assess potential attrition bias, baseline characteristics were compared between children who completed follow‐up and those who were lost to follow‐up. No significant differences were observed in age at seizure onset (median 9 vs. 10 months, p = 0.087), SCN1A variant type (missense vs. truncating; χ2 = 0.008; df = 1; p = 0.93), or initial FS classification (SFS vs. CFS; χ2 = 0.030; df = 1; p = 0.862), suggesting that loss to follow‐up unlikely introduced major systematic bias.

Among the 106 patients with complete follow‐up data, FS progressed to DS in 33 (31.1%), whereas it remained GEFS+, FS+, and FS in 45 (42.5%), 14 (13.2%), and 14 (13.2%), respectively, within the follow‐up period. Among individuals whose condition progressed to DS, 20 had truncating variants and 13 had missense variants—10 located in the pore‐loop region, 2 in the conserved C‐terminal region, and 1 in the S1‐S3 segments (Figure S1).

Neurodevelopmental comorbidities included sleep disorders (n = 1), social difficulties (n = 1), attention deficit hyperactivity disorders (n = 4), learning disabilities (n = 4), and irritability (n = 5). All patients with DS showed some degree of intellectual disability.

The treatment responses of the 106 patients with complete follow‐up data were classified according to medication use and seizure control.

Seven patients (6.6%) remained seizure‐free throughout follow‐up without receiving antiepileptic medications.

Intermittent prophylaxis (levetiracetam, diazepam, or antipyretics) was given to 21 patients (19.8%) during febrile episodes. Among them, 5 remained seizure‐free after the prophylaxis was discontinued, 2 experienced seizures only during febrile episodes without prophylaxis, and 14 continued to have FS despite preventive treatment. However, no further adjustments were made due to the low frequency of seizures.

Continuous antiepileptic therapy was administered to 78 patients (73.6%). Among them, 37 achieved complete seizure control, including 7 who transitioned from intermittent to continuous treatment. Another 38 patients experienced reduced seizure frequency without achieving full control, and 3 showed poor treatment response, possibly reflecting drug resistance or disease progression.

4DiscussionTo the best of our knowledge, this is the first multicenter study to report the diagnostic yield of pathogenic SCN1A variants in an FS population. Importantly, once an SCN1A variant is detected in a child with FS, the management paradigm shifts from viewing FS as isolated events to proactive monitoring based on molecular risk. A considerable proportion of patients with no family history or initial diagnoses with SFS carried pathogenic SCN1A variants, highlighting the importance of molecular screening for the early identification of high‐risk individuals. Variant distribution across functional domains revealed the limitations of relying solely on clinical classification for phenotype prediction. Conversely, different variant types and domain‐specific distributions were associated with age at seizure onset and phenotype severity, suggesting the role of molecular information in phenotype stratification. Our study supports the integration of early molecular diagnosis into FS management, particularly for patients at risk of developing DS, where timely intervention may prevent the neurological damage associated with recurrent status epilepticus.FS evaluation primarily consists of the characterization of its type [20]. For children with features of SFS, assessing the underlying febrile causes is sufficient; no specific treatment is typically indicated [21, 22]. However, such strategies have limitations in the early identification of potential genetic causes. Therefore, in this study, we conducted molecular screening of the heat‐sensitive gene SCN1A in a large FS cohort and analyzed the clinical characteristics of individuals with pathogenic variants. The overall detection rate was significantly higher in the CFS group than in the SFS group (6.8% vs. 4.0%, p = 0.001). Although genetic testing was applied uniformly regardless of clinical subtype, this finding suggests that patients with CFS may have a higher likelihood of CFS overlapping SCN1A‐related seizures. This is further supported by our follow‐up data, which showed that 26 of the 33 patients who developed DS were initially diagnosed with CFS. Additionally, the genetic risk in children initially diagnosed with SFS should not be underestimated. Four percent of the children initially diagnosed with SFS were confirmed to have pathogenic SCN1A variants through genetic screening, and this included seven patients whose condition progressed to DS during follow‐up. Our analysis also revealed that among the 26 variants reported in patients with SFS, 12 were previously associated with DS. These findings highlight the heterogeneity of the early clinical manifestations of SCN1A‐related disorders and the limitations of relying solely on initial seizure type for risk assessment.We found that 63.1% of pathogenic variant carriers had no family history of FS or epilepsy among first‐ or second‐degree relatives. Further statistical analysis showed no significant association between family history and the detection rate of pathogenic SCN1A variants (p = 0.321), underscoring the limited utility of family history in risk assessment. The penetrance and clinical phenotypic heterogeneity of SCN1A variants further reduce the proportion of affected relatives [23]. Another possible explanation is the high proportion of de novo variants among pathogenic variants. Our results show that 53.2% of the detected pathogenic variants were de novo, consistent with prior studies reporting that approximately 50% of SCN1A variants in epilepsy cohorts arise spontaneously [24]. De novo SCN1A variants were found in 95% of the severe DS phenotypes and in 3.7% of patients with GEFS+ [24, 25]. The unpredictability of de novo mutations further limits the utility of family history in risk assessment and highlights the clinical value of molecular screening for genetic risk stratification.Among the 141 pathogenic SCN1A variants identified, 37.6% were novel, demonstrating the potential of large‐scale molecular screening in identifying new variants. However, assessing the functional effects of these variants remains challenging. Functional studies are time‐consuming, expensive, and currently available for only a small subset of SCN1A variants [16, 26]. In the absence of functional validation, genotype–phenotype correlation analysis provides a valuable complementary approach to support phenotype prediction and clinical decision‐making [26]. We observed that patients with truncating variants had significantly earlier seizure onset than those with missense variants. Truncating variants typically result in complete LOF through nonsense‐mediated mRNA decay [18], and missense variants may retain partial function, potentially leading to delayed onset. Moreover, truncating variants were evenly distributed across the SCN1A protein, suggesting that their functional effects dominate the pathogenicity, rather than having a localized impact on specific functional domains. Our follow‐up data supports this observation; among the 25 patients with truncating variants, 20 experienced progression to DS. The remaining patients exhibited GEFS+ or FS+ phenotypes, although the possibility of mosaicism could not be excluded.A recent study proposed the concept of genetic dependent stage and suggested that the age‐dependent expression of a gene may contribute to the timing of disease onset [27]. Truncating variants may cause significant neuronal dysfunction before SCN1A expression reaches its peak, leading to early onset. SCN1A expression in the brain begins after birth, peaking at approximately 6 months, which coincides with the age of epilepsy onset [28]. In our study, the median age at seizure onset in patients with SCN1A variants was 10 months, possibly reflecting the inclusion of mild‐ or late‐onset patients who would not typically undergo genetic testing in traditional clinical pathways. Additionally, we observed a wide range of ages at seizure onset (2–60 months), consistent with that reported by Luo et al. (day 1 to 7.5 years) [28]. These observations highlight the temporal heterogeneity of SCN1A‐related phenotypes. Beyond the variant, factors such as genetic modifiers, somatic mosaicism, and environmental influences may also contribute to the variability in the age at onset.The high prevalence of missense SCN1A variants presents a significant challenge in predicting their impact on channel kinetics [16]. Missense variants accounted for 76.5% of all pathogenic SCN1A variants and were primarily located in critical functional domains, including S4, S4–5, S5–6, D3–4, and the conserved C‐terminus. In particular, the pore‐forming region is critical for sodium ion selectivity and overall channel function [29]. Our analysis revealed that the missense variants that affect pore regions were linked to early seizure onset, and the reported variants in these regions were significantly enriched in severe phenotypes. In contrast, variants with less critical functions were frequently associated with mild phenotypes. These domain‐specific patterns were not observed when the variants were grouped by clinical diagnosis, suggesting that genotype‐based stratification may be more reliable than clinical features alone in predicting long‐term outcomes.With the development of precision medicine, traditional clinical classifications seem inadequate for meeting the current needs of diagnosis and treatment. Early genetic testing can provide early diagnosis before typical features appear, enabling timely intervention to prevent cognitive decline and neurological damage [30]. Distinguishing DS from GEFS+ has been a key focus, particularly in patients with early or atypical symptoms [31, 32]. Brunklaus et al. developed a prediction model using an SCN1A variant score and age at seizure onset to differentiate between DS and GEFS+ early [31]. They provided a convenient online tool to help clinicians rapidly predict disease progression and guide early intervention decisions. In our cohort, follow‐up plans were tailored based on variant type, variant location, and age at onset. Patients with frequent CFS or parental concerns received intermittent prophylactic treatment, which was effective in most cases. In high‐risk patients, early antiepileptic treatment and avoidance of sodium channel blockers prevented status epilepticus and sudden unexpected death. Molecular diagnosis also reduces diagnostic uncertainty and the emotional burden on families, contributing to improved care quality. Therefore, we support offering optional molecular screening programs to patients with FS, particularly those with early onset or CFS features, to improve precision diagnosis and optimize clinical care.This study had a selection bias. Although the program covered medical institutions at different levels nationwide and genetic screening followed unified criteria at each center, parental consent for participation might have been influenced by perceived illness severity or economic factors, leading to a relatively higher proportion of children with CFS. Additionally, some children were excluded because of limited access to medical care during the COVID‐19 pandemic. Future studies should incorporate a larger sample of children with SFS to improve the representativeness of their findings. Our study had some limitations. First, all samples were from the Chinese population, potentially limiting generalizability to children from other ethnicities; validation in ethnically diverse cohorts is required. Second, functional analysis of the variants was limited by the relatively small sample size; expanding the cohort will enhance statistical robustness. Finally, follow‐up duration may have been insufficient to determine long‐term clinical outcomes. Extended follow‐up studies are required to comprehensively evaluate the efficacy of early interventions and further clarify the relationship between SCN1A variants and clinical phenotypes.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first multicenter study to report the diagnostic yield of pathogenic SCN1A variants in an FS population. Importantly, once an SCN1A variant is detected in a child with FS, the management paradigm shifts from viewing FS as isolated events to proactive monitoring based on molecular risk. A considerable proportion of patients with no family history or initial diagnoses with SFS carried pathogenic SCN1A variants, highlighting the importance of molecular screening for the early identification of high‐risk individuals. Variant distribution across functional domains revealed the limitations of relying solely on clinical classification for phenotype prediction. Conversely, different variant types and domain‐specific distributions were associated with age at seizure onset and phenotype severity, suggesting the role of molecular information in phenotype stratification. Our study supports the integration of early molecular diagnosis into FS management, particularly for patients at risk of developing DS, where timely intervention may prevent the neurological damage associated with recurrent status epilepticus.

FS evaluation primarily consists of the characterization of its type [20]. For children with features of SFS, assessing the underlying febrile causes is sufficient; no specific treatment is typically indicated [21, 22]. However, such strategies have limitations in the early identification of potential genetic causes. Therefore, in this study, we conducted molecular screening of the heat‐sensitive gene SCN1A in a large FS cohort and analyzed the clinical characteristics of individuals with pathogenic variants. The overall detection rate was significantly higher in the CFS group than in the SFS group (6.8% vs. 4.0%, p = 0.001). Although genetic testing was applied uniformly regardless of clinical subtype, this finding suggests that patients with CFS may have a higher likelihood of CFS overlapping SCN1A‐related seizures. This is further supported by our follow‐up data, which showed that 26 of the 33 patients who developed DS were initially diagnosed with CFS. Additionally, the genetic risk in children initially diagnosed with SFS should not be underestimated. Four percent of the children initially diagnosed with SFS were confirmed to have pathogenic SCN1A variants through genetic screening, and this included seven patients whose condition progressed to DS during follow‐up. Our analysis also revealed that among the 26 variants reported in patients with SFS, 12 were previously associated with DS. These findings highlight the heterogeneity of the early clinical manifestations of SCN1A‐related disorders and the limitations of relying solely on initial seizure type for risk assessment.

We found that 63.1% of pathogenic variant carriers had no family history of FS or epilepsy among first‐ or second‐degree relatives. Further statistical analysis showed no significant association between family history and the detection rate of pathogenic SCN1A variants (p = 0.321), underscoring the limited utility of family history in risk assessment. The penetrance and clinical phenotypic heterogeneity of SCN1A variants further reduce the proportion of affected relatives [23]. Another possible explanation is the high proportion of de novo variants among pathogenic variants. Our results show that 53.2% of the detected pathogenic variants were de novo, consistent with prior studies reporting that approximately 50% of SCN1A variants in epilepsy cohorts arise spontaneously [24]. De novo SCN1A variants were found in 95% of the severe DS phenotypes and in 3.7% of patients with GEFS+ [24, 25]. The unpredictability of de novo mutations further limits the utility of family history in risk assessment and highlights the clinical value of molecular screening for genetic risk stratification.

Among the 141 pathogenic SCN1A variants identified, 37.6% were novel, demonstrating the potential of large‐scale molecular screening in identifying new variants. However, assessing the functional effects of these variants remains challenging. Functional studies are time‐consuming, expensive, and currently available for only a small subset of SCN1A variants [16, 26]. In the absence of functional validation, genotype–phenotype correlation analysis provides a valuable complementary approach to support phenotype prediction and clinical decision‐making [26]. We observed that patients with truncating variants had significantly earlier seizure onset than those with missense variants. Truncating variants typically result in complete LOF through nonsense‐mediated mRNA decay [18], and missense variants may retain partial function, potentially leading to delayed onset. Moreover, truncating variants were evenly distributed across the SCN1A protein, suggesting that their functional effects dominate the pathogenicity, rather than having a localized impact on specific functional domains. Our follow‐up data supports this observation; among the 25 patients with truncating variants, 20 experienced progression to DS. The remaining patients exhibited GEFS+ or FS+ phenotypes, although the possibility of mosaicism could not be excluded.

A recent study proposed the concept of genetic dependent stage and suggested that the age‐dependent expression of a gene may contribute to the timing of disease onset [27]. Truncating variants may cause significant neuronal dysfunction before SCN1A expression reaches its peak, leading to early onset. SCN1A expression in the brain begins after birth, peaking at approximately 6 months, which coincides with the age of epilepsy onset [28]. In our study, the median age at seizure onset in patients with SCN1A variants was 10 months, possibly reflecting the inclusion of mild‐ or late‐onset patients who would not typically undergo genetic testing in traditional clinical pathways. Additionally, we observed a wide range of ages at seizure onset (2–60 months), consistent with that reported by Luo et al. (day 1 to 7.5 years) [28]. These observations highlight the temporal heterogeneity of SCN1A‐related phenotypes. Beyond the variant, factors such as genetic modifiers, somatic mosaicism, and environmental influences may also contribute to the variability in the age at onset.

The high prevalence of missense SCN1A variants presents a significant challenge in predicting their impact on channel kinetics [16]. Missense variants accounted for 76.5% of all pathogenic SCN1A variants and were primarily located in critical functional domains, including S4, S4–5, S5–6, D3–4, and the conserved C‐terminus. In particular, the pore‐forming region is critical for sodium ion selectivity and overall channel function [29]. Our analysis revealed that the missense variants that affect pore regions were linked to early seizure onset, and the reported variants in these regions were significantly enriched in severe phenotypes. In contrast, variants with less critical functions were frequently associated with mild phenotypes. These domain‐specific patterns were not observed when the variants were grouped by clinical diagnosis, suggesting that genotype‐based stratification may be more reliable than clinical features alone in predicting long‐term outcomes.

With the development of precision medicine, traditional clinical classifications seem inadequate for meeting the current needs of diagnosis and treatment. Early genetic testing can provide early diagnosis before typical features appear, enabling timely intervention to prevent cognitive decline and neurological damage [30]. Distinguishing DS from GEFS+ has been a key focus, particularly in patients with early or atypical symptoms [31, 32]. Brunklaus et al. developed a prediction model using an SCN1A variant score and age at seizure onset to differentiate between DS and GEFS+ early [31]. They provided a convenient online tool to help clinicians rapidly predict disease progression and guide early intervention decisions. In our cohort, follow‐up plans were tailored based on variant type, variant location, and age at onset. Patients with frequent CFS or parental concerns received intermittent prophylactic treatment, which was effective in most cases. In high‐risk patients, early antiepileptic treatment and avoidance of sodium channel blockers prevented status epilepticus and sudden unexpected death. Molecular diagnosis also reduces diagnostic uncertainty and the emotional burden on families, contributing to improved care quality. Therefore, we support offering optional molecular screening programs to patients with FS, particularly those with early onset or CFS features, to improve precision diagnosis and optimize clinical care.

This study had a selection bias. Although the program covered medical institutions at different levels nationwide and genetic screening followed unified criteria at each center, parental consent for participation might have been influenced by perceived illness severity or economic factors, leading to a relatively higher proportion of children with CFS. Additionally, some children were excluded because of limited access to medical care during the COVID‐19 pandemic. Future studies should incorporate a larger sample of children with SFS to improve the representativeness of their findings. Our study had some limitations. First, all samples were from the Chinese population, potentially limiting generalizability to children from other ethnicities; validation in ethnically diverse cohorts is required. Second, functional analysis of the variants was limited by the relatively small sample size; expanding the cohort will enhance statistical robustness. Finally, follow‐up duration may have been insufficient to determine long‐term clinical outcomes. Extended follow‐up studies are required to comprehensively evaluate the efficacy of early interventions and further clarify the relationship between SCN1A variants and clinical phenotypes.

5ConclusionsThis large‐scale cohort study on patients with FS demonstrates the feasibility and clinical value of early diagnosis of SCN1A‐related seizures through molecular screening. It also highlights a shift from traditional risk assessment based on clinical classification to precise evaluation based on molecular information. Incorporating SCN1A molecular screening as an option for evaluating FS may offer a new pathway for timely intervention in high‐risk individuals.

Conclusions

This large‐scale cohort study on patients with FS demonstrates the feasibility and clinical value of early diagnosis of SCN1A‐related seizures through molecular screening. It also highlights a shift from traditional risk assessment based on clinical classification to precise evaluation based on molecular information. Incorporating SCN1A molecular screening as an option for evaluating FS may offer a new pathway for timely intervention in high‐risk individuals.

Li‐Ping Zou and Jia Wang: concept and design. Li‐Ping Zou, Jia Wang, Yang‐Yang Wang, Lin‐Yan Hu, Xiu‐Yu Shi, Wen He, Dan Sun, Baoguang Li, Xiaoming Liu, Sanqing Xu, Lijun Du, and Chunhui Tang: acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data. Li‐Ping Zou, Jia Wang, and Yang‐Yang Wang: drafting of the manuscript. Li‐Ping Zou, Jia Wang, Yang‐Yang Wang, Lin‐Yan Hu, Xiu‐Yu Shi, and Wen He: critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content. Li‐Ping Zou and Jia Wang: statistical analysis. Li‐Ping Zou, Lin‐Yan Hu, Xiu‐Yu Shi, Dan Sun, Baoguang Li, Xiaoming Liu, Sanqing Xu, Lijun Du, and Chunhui Tang: administrative, technical, or material support. Li‐Ping Zou, Jia Wang, Yang‐Yang Wang, Lin‐Yan Hu, Xiu‐Yu Shi, Wen He, Dan Sun, Baoguang Li, Xiaoming Liu, Sanqing Xu, Lijun Du, and Chunhui Tang: supervision. All authors reviewed and edited the manuscript, as well as had full access to all the data in the study and accept responsibility to submit for publication.

Conflicts of InterestThe authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Conflicts of Interest

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Supporting information
Supplementary Methods. Detailed description of DNA extraction, gene panel sequencing, bioinformatics analysis, and CNV detection.
Table S1. Summary of SCN1A variants identified in 141 children with FS.
Table S2. Distribution of SCN1A variants across functional domains.
Figure S1. Phenotypic outcomes in SCN1A variant carriers stratified by initial clinical diagnosis (SFS vs. CFS) and variant characteristics.

Supporting information

Supplementary Methods. Detailed description of DNA extraction, gene panel sequencing, bioinformatics analysis, and CNV detection.

Table S1. Summary of SCN1A variants identified in 141 children with FS.

Table S2. Distribution of SCN1A variants across functional domains.

Figure S1. Phenotypic outcomes in SCN1A variant carriers stratified by initial clinical diagnosis (SFS vs. CFS) and variant characteristics.
