---
pmid: '39094565'
title: Mapping the dynamics of epigenetic adaptation in S. pombe during heterochromatin
  misregulation.
authors:
- Larkin A
- Kunze C
- Seman M
- Levashkevich A
- Curran J
- Morris-Evans D
- Lemieux S
- Khalil AS
- Ragunathan K
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2024'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC11338711
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2024.07.006
---

# Mapping the dynamics of epigenetic adaptation in S. pombe during heterochromatin misregulation.
**Authors:** Larkin A, Kunze C, Seman M, Levashkevich A, Curran J, Morris-Evans D, Lemieux S, Khalil AS, Ragunathan K
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2024.07.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2024.07.006)
**PMC:** [PMC11338711](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11338711/)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2024 Aug 19;59(16):2222-2238.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2024.07.006. 
Epub 2024 Aug 1.

Mapping the dynamics of epigenetic adaptation in S. pombe during heterochromatin 
misregulation.

Larkin A(1), Kunze C(2), Seman M(1), Levashkevich A(1), Curran J(1), 
Morris-Evans D(1), Lemieux S(1), Khalil AS(3), Ragunathan K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02453, USA.
(2)Biological Design Center, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA; 
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(3)Biological Design Center, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA; 
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA; 
Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: khalil@bu.edu.
(4)Department of Biology, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02453, USA. 
Electronic address: kaushikr@brandeis.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Apr 05:2023.07.10.548368. doi: 10.1101/2023.07.10.548368.

Epigenetic mechanisms enable cells to develop novel adaptive phenotypes without 
altering their genetic blueprint. Recent studies show histone modifications, 
such as heterochromatin-defining H3K9 methylation (H3K9me), can be redistributed 
to establish adaptive phenotypes. We developed a precision-engineered genetic 
approach to trigger heterochromatin misregulation on-demand in fission yeast. 
This enabled us to trace genome-scale RNA and H3K9me changes over time in 
long-term, continuous cultures. Adaptive H3K9me establishes over remarkably slow 
timescales relative to the initiating stress. We captured dynamic H3K9me 
redistribution events which depend on an RNA binding complex MTREC, ultimately 
leading to cells converging on an optimal adaptive solution. Upon stress 
removal, cells relax to new transcriptional and chromatin states, establishing 
memory that is tunable and primed for future adaptive epigenetic responses. 
Collectively, we identify the slow kinetics of epigenetic adaptation that allow 
cells to discover and heritably encode novel adaptive solutions, with 
implications for drug resistance and response to infection.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2024.07.006
PMCID: PMC11338711
PMID: 39094565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Adaptation enables cells to survive new or changing environments by establishing novel phenotypes that enhance cell fitness. 1 , 2 These dynamic processes govern how organisms respond to a wide range of physiological contexts, including how cells in our body respond to infections, how cancer cells react to chemotherapeutic agents, and how microbes develop antibiotic and antifungal resistance. 3 – 5 One major mechanism that cells leverage to acquire new phenotypes is altering their DNA sequence through genetic mutations. 6 Although beneficial mutations in populations are rare, cells that acquire such mutations eventually outcompete those that fail to adapt. 7 , 8 However, genetic mutations represent an inflexible commitment to a new environment that cannot be reversed following a return to cellular homeostasis. 9 , 10 Furthermore, it is well known that genetic adaptation to one condition is often associated with a fitness loss in other environments and hence such changes may represent sub-optimal and terminal solutions amidst fluctuating environments. 11

Alternatively, through epigenetic adaptation, cells acquire new phenotypes without changing their genetic blueprint. 12 While genetic mutations are irreversible, epigenetic changes can buffer against deleterious mutations without compromising overall fitness of the cell. 11 , 13 In principle, this strategy offers a dynamic, reversible, and flexible form of adaptation well-suited to rapidly changing environmental conditions especially when such conditions persist only for a few generations. 14 – 16 Moreover, due to the flexibility of this mode of adaptation, epigenetic changes often pose serious clinical challenges during the evolution of chemotherapy resistance in cancer cells or the widespread emergence of antifungal resistance. 17 – 21 , 21 Thus, understanding how cells leverage adaptive epigenetic mechanisms and targeting such pathways can help us achieve improved clinical outcomes.

In one striking example of heritable and reversible epigenetic adaptation, the yeast translation-termination factor Sup35 can self-aggregate under stress to form the [ PSI + ] prion. 22 , 23 [ PSI + ] sequesters soluble (active) Sup35, promoting genome-wide translation readthrough, and uncovering previously cryptic genetic variation. The aggregated conformational state, when activated, rapidly unlocks novel and heritable phenotypes that may be beneficial in unanticipated conditions. How can other epigenetic pathways similarly unleash latent, heritable, and adaptive phenotypes?

Considerable evidence suggest that cells can alter their transcriptomes in response to stress through alterations in chromatin accessibility, rewiring existing regulatory networks, and orchestrating wholesale changes in histone modification states. 18 , 24 – 30 Moreover, recent work has shown that diverse histone modifications with other canonical functions may have adaptive potential by being dynamically redistributed to new genomic loci under different stress conditions. 19 – 21 How cells exploit these heritable, chromatin-based epigenetic programs to discover genes that can be activated or repressed to enhance fitness and survival remains mysterious.

In principle, successful adaptive dynamic redistribution of histone modifications must in principle meet three critical requirements. First, modifications spatially relocate, either through spreading from existing sites or the formation of new islands at novel locations in the genome. This critically allows cells to sample altered chromatin and transcriptional states. Next, the resulting histone modification-dependent changes in gene expression must benefit cells and subsequent progeny in their new environment. 31 This maintains cells with the optimal adaptive solution in the population. Lastly, persisting memory of the new cell state can prepare cells to more rapidly respond to a future instance of being exposed to the initiating stress. 32 – 36 Thus, to faithfully map epigenetic adaptation pathways, it is necessary to reconstruct these highly dynamic processes and be able to connect genome-wide changes at the RNA and chromatin levels with cell fitness prior to and following adaptation.

To reconstruct these dynamics, we developed an experimental system based on the fission yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe . In S.pombe , H3K9 methylation (H3K9me) specifies silent epigenetic states otherwise referred to as heterochromatin. 37 Although heterochromatin normally resides at regulatory regions of the genome, such as centromeres and telomeres, H3K9me can also be deployed to downregulate novel targets. 38 – 46 One example of an acute stress in S.pombe that elicits an adaptive epigenetic response is so-called “heterochromatin misregulation”. Deleting two major H3K9me antagonists – the H3K14 histone acetyltransferase Mst2 and the putative H3K9 demethylase Epe1 – leads to the adaptive silencing of the sole H3K9 methyltransferase, Clr4, suppressing aberrant genome wide H3K9 methylation and restoring fitness. 47 We reasoned that this system would provide an ideal, minimal, and genetically pliable framework to induce heterochromatin misregulation and unveil the sequence of events that occur prior to adaptation.

We developed a precision genetic approach to trigger and release heterochromatin misregulation on-demand. 48 , 49 Taking inspiration from laboratory evolution experiments, which have been powerful in defining genetic adaptations in microbial populations grown under selective pressure, we coupled this ability to induce heterochromatin misregulation with advanced continuous culture methods that allow us to quantify cell fitness in real-time and identify causal genome-wide transcriptional and chromatin-state changes. 50 Our inducible experimental system is a significant departure from previous studies that focused primarily on beginning and end-state measurements. 21 By quantifying cell-fitness in yeast populations, we could precisely trace the time evolution of the adaptive silencing program under multiple cycles of heterochromatin stress and recovery. Our approach uncovers how cells can redistribute H3K9me, records network-level changes in transcription, and defines how this dynamic interplay unlocks cryptic epigenetic variation to enable cell survival under conditions of acute stress. In summary, our study captures key features of how cells turn an existing regulatory pathway that normally ensures H3K9 methylation is deposited only at constitutive sites into an adaptive mechanism with implications for drug resistance and response to infection.

DISCUSSION

Cells can leverage epigenetic pathways to modulate gene expression states in response to environmental change. In fission yeast, H3K9 methylation exhibits adaptive potential when cells encounter various environmental stressors, including anti-fungals, caffeine, or nutrient restriction. 21 , 39 , 57 , 74 , 75 These stressors impact two major H3K9me regulators, Epe1 and Mst2, at RNA and protein levels. Our ability to rapidly and reversibly control Epe1 and Mst2 levels enables us to mimic the natural stress response of fission yeast cells, independent of environmental factors. Holistically, we propose the following model for epigenetic adaptation. Exposure to stress causes Epe1 to undergo proteasome-mediated degradation while Mst2 produces a MYST-domain deficient isoform. 21 , 57 This manifests a slow-growth phenotype that allows for an adaptive silencing pathway to redistribute H3K9me. While our inducible depletion system has several controlled variables that separate it from a natural system, it undeniably provides a window into the earliest transcriptomic changes that cells undergo prior to adaptation.

Our system enables the capture of early and intermediate transcriptional states that lead to adaptive silencing of clr4+ which would be impossible to visualize using conventional genetic methods. 47 Notably, we found that adaptive clr4+ silencing takes up to 120 hours, which is two orders of magnitude slower than the timescale of Epe1 depletion (~30 minutes). We propose these dynamics may represent a bet-hedging strategy, where cells reversibly sample transcriptional states to enhance fitness before converging on a solution. 76 Our findings parallel stochastic tuning models in budding yeast, which posit that transcriptional noise is positively selected to promote cell survival in novel environmental conditions. 24 , 25

We observed transient activation of genes associated with the core environmental stress response (CESR), which serve as an on-pathway intermediate preceding adaptation. 60 These dynamics strikingly resemble how cancer cells develop resistance, resulting in poor prognosis and treatment outcomes. For example, glioblastoma cells transiently exit the cell cycle, exhibit slow growth, misregulate H3K27 methylation-dependent epigenetic pathways, and ultimately adapt by entering a state that is refractory to chemotherapeutic interventions. 19 Bacteria also enter slow-growing persister states through the activation of a stress-induced SOS pathway, leading to genetic changes and antibiotic resistance. 8 , 77 In both instances, slow growth is a common denominator that is triggered by the activation of the stress response pathway. Thus, the activation of stress response pathways may represent a general principle that cells leverage to explore adaptive phenotypes when exposed to novel environments. 60

It is possible that the unregulated expansion of H3K9me during early heterochromatin misregulation leads to essential gene silencing that disrupts fitness and cell survival. This could represent a temporary switch in growth strategy to a slow proliferation state until beneficial adaptations can be acquired. The expansion of heterochromatin domains over essential genes could also act as a filter for stress and adaptive responses. Since the spatial expansion of heterochromatin must build over time, cells would need to experience sustained exposure to a stressor before committing to adaptive H3K9me redistribution, preventing premature adaptive responses to transient environmental perturbations.

Establishing adaptive heterochromatin at the clr4+ locus follows unique dynamics that are distinct from H3K9me-spreading at other regions during heterochromatin misregulation. These dynamics suggest active recruitment of heterochromatin initiation and maintenance factors that have adaptive potential, which partially depends on the MTREC subunit, Red1. This raises the possibility that adaptive silencing is mediated by co-transcriptional or post-transcriptional processes that involve non-coding RNA recognition. 56 , 61 , 62 , 78 The expansion of Red1-dependent H3K9me islands during the initial stress phase contributes to activating stress response pathways, thus explaining why deleting Red1 alleviates stress and leads to slower clr4+ silencing. How this RNA elimination machinery affects the formation of de novo adaptive heterochromatin in other stress contexts, and the extent to which it can be repurposed when cells encounter novel environments, requires further investigation. Our results from relocating cdk9+ also support this model, and reveal how the arrangement of genes on chromosomes could confer unforeseen advantages for cell survival. This is particularly intriguing given that the mei4+ and cdk9+ preserve synteny even in the highly diverged Schizosaccharomyces japonicus, suggesting how the potential for organisms to adapt could be an emergent property that shapes genome organization. 79 Additionally, our results mirror recent work where inhibition of the human CDK9 ortholog produces transcriptional reprogramming, supporting a model where the inhibition or transient repression of essential genes encourages epigenetic adaptations. 80 How other transiently-silenced essential genes, including the previously identified cup1+ gene, modulate the formation of epigenetic adaptations requires further investigation.

Our unique ability to toggle Epe1 expression enabled us to determine that cells can retain adaptive epigenetic memory. This memory is dependent on residual H3K9 methylation that qualitatively resembles earlier work, where adding back Epe1 permanently poises cells in a novel, fixed epigenetic state. 81 In contrast, re-expressing Epe1 in our inducible system leads to total clr4+ de-repression, despite significant H3K9me3 being present during recovery. This suggests that H3K9me3 is required for memory, but silencing requires other factors involved in different tiers of transcriptional, co-transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation. 82 – 85 Additionally, Epe1-expressing short recovery cells exhibit unique gene expression signatures, supporting our speculation that memory and adaptive silencing may depend on these novel network-level gene expression changes. 27 , 54 , 86 We propose that these features encode a form of cellular hysteresis ( Figure 7E ). 87 It remains to be seen whether other epigenetic regulators also exhibit hysteresis given the slow kinetics of establishing novel epigenetic states de novo . 88

In conclusion, our inducible system uniquely allowed us to capture highly dynamic changes in gene expression and chromatin states following acute heterochromatin misregulation, changes that would be otherwise obscured in conventional genetic assays. Using this approach, we faithfully reconstructed pathways that cells undertake through adaptation, and investigated how the adapted state is preserved across multiple generations. Our findings reveal several key and distinguishing features of adaptation by epigenetic responses, and illuminates strategies by which cells stabilize new gene expression programs to endure environmental change. Ultimately, we demonstrate a powerful experimental framework to probe adaptation mediated by chromatin regulation which represents an exciting frontier offering insights into phenotypic plasticity.
