---
pmid: '16114877'
title: NmerA, the metal binding domain of mercuric ion reductase, removes Hg2+ from
  proteins, delivers it to the catalytic core, and protects cells under glutathione-depleted
  conditions.
authors:
- Ledwidge R
- Patel B
- Dong A
- Fiedler D
- Falkowski M
- Zelikova J
- Summers AO
- Pai EF
- Miller SM
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi050519d
---

# NmerA, the metal binding domain of mercuric ion reductase, removes Hg2+ from proteins, delivers it to the catalytic core, and protects cells under glutathione-depleted conditions.
**Authors:** Ledwidge R, Patel B, Dong A, Fiedler D, Falkowski M, Zelikova J, Summers AO, Pai EF, Miller SM
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi050519d](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi050519d)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2005 Aug 30;44(34):11402-16. doi: 10.1021/bi050519d.

NmerA, the metal binding domain of mercuric ion reductase, removes Hg2+ from 
proteins, delivers it to the catalytic core, and protects cells under 
glutathione-depleted conditions.

Ledwidge R(1), Patel B, Dong A, Fiedler D, Falkowski M, Zelikova J, Summers AO, 
Pai EF, Miller SM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California-San 
Francisco, 600 16th Street, San Francisco, California 94143-2280, USA.

The ligand binding and catalytic properties of heavy metal ions have led to the 
evolution of metal ion-specific pathways for control of their intracellular 
trafficking and/or elimination. Small MW proteins/domains containing a GMTCXXC 
metal binding motif in a betaalphabetabetaalphabeta fold are common among 
proteins controlling the mobility of soft metal ions such as Cu(1+), Zn(2+), and 
Hg(2+), and the functions of several have been established. In bacterial 
mercuric ion reductases (MerA), which catalyze reduction of Hg(2+) to Hg(0) as a 
means of detoxification, one or two repeats of sequences with this fold are 
highly conserved as N-terminal domains (NmerA) of uncertain function. To 
simplify functional analysis of NmerA, we cloned and expressed the domain and 
catalytic core of Tn501 MerA as separate proteins. In this paper, we show Tn501 
NmerA to be a stable, soluble protein that binds 1 Hg(2+)/domain and delivers it 
to the catalytic core at kinetically competent rates. Comparison of steady-state 
data for full-length versus catalytic core MerA using Hg(glutathione)(2) or 
Hg(thioredoxin) as substrate demonstrates that the NmerA domain does participate 
in acquisition and delivery of Hg(2+) to the catalytic core during the reduction 
catalyzed by full-length MerA, particularly when Hg(2+) is bound to a protein. 
Finally, comparison of growth curves for glutathione-depleted Escherichia coli 
expressing either catalytic core, full-length, or a combination of core plus 
NmerA shows an increased protection of cells against Hg(2+) in the media when 
NmerA is present, providing the first evidence of a functional role for this 
highly conserved domain.

DOI: 10.1021/bi050519d
PMID: 16114877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
