---
pmid: '26833090'
title: Non-catalytic Roles for XPG with BRCA1 and BRCA2 in Homologous Recombination
  and Genome Stability.
authors:
- Trego KS
- Groesser T
- Davalos AR
- Parplys AC
- Zhao W
- Nelson MR
- Hlaing A
- Shih B
- Rydberg B
- Pluth JM
- Tsai MS
- Hoeijmakers JHJ
- Sung P
- Wiese C
- Campisi J
- Cooper PK
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC4761302
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.12.026
---

# Non-catalytic Roles for XPG with BRCA1 and BRCA2 in Homologous Recombination and Genome Stability.
**Authors:** Trego KS, Groesser T, Davalos AR, Parplys AC, Zhao W, Nelson MR, Hlaing A, Shih B, Rydberg B, Pluth JM, Tsai MS, Hoeijmakers JHJ, Sung P, Wiese C, Campisi J, Cooper PK
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2015.12.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2015.12.026)
**PMC:** [PMC4761302](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4761302/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2016 Feb 18;61(4):535-546. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.12.026. Epub 
2016 Jan 28.

Non-catalytic Roles for XPG with BRCA1 and BRCA2 in Homologous Recombination and 
Genome Stability.

Trego KS(1), Groesser T(1), Davalos AR(2), Parplys AC(1), Zhao W(3), Nelson 
MR(1), Hlaing A(1), Shih B(1), Rydberg B(1), Pluth JM(1), Tsai MS(1), 
Hoeijmakers JHJ(4), Sung P(3), Wiese C(1), Campisi J(5), Cooper PK(6).

Author information:
(1)Biosciences, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(2)The Buck Institute for Research on Aging, Novato, CA 94945, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, 3000 CA Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands.
(5)Biosciences, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA; 
The Buck Institute for Research on Aging, Novato, CA 94945, USA.
(6)Biosciences, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. 
Electronic address: pkcooper@lbl.gov.

XPG is a structure-specific endonuclease required for nucleotide excision 
repair, and incision-defective XPG mutations cause the skin cancer-prone 
syndrome xeroderma pigmentosum. Truncating mutations instead cause the 
neurodevelopmental progeroid disorder Cockayne syndrome, but little is known 
about how XPG loss results in this devastating disease. We identify XPG as a 
partner of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in maintaining genomic stability through homologous 
recombination (HRR). XPG depletion causes DNA double-strand breaks, chromosomal 
abnormalities, cell-cycle delays, defective HRR, inability to overcome 
replication fork stalling, and replication stress. XPG directly interacts with 
BRCA2, RAD51, and PALB2, and XPG depletion reduces their chromatin binding and 
subsequent RAD51 foci formation. Upstream in HRR, XPG interacts directly with 
BRCA1. Its depletion causes BRCA1 hyper-phosphorylation and persistent chromatin 
binding. These unexpected findings establish XPG as an HRR protein with 
important roles in genome stability and suggest how XPG defects produce severe 
clinical consequences including cancer and accelerated aging.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.12.026
PMCID: PMC4761302
PMID: 26833090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Unrepaired DNA lesions from both environmental and endogenous sources impede replication fork progression and result in replication stress ( Magdalou et al., 2014 ; Zeman and Cimprich, 2014 ). Repair intermediates, e.g. single-strand breaks, also can interfere with replication and be processed by it into more severe lesions, DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). In addition, encounters with transcription pose a major problem for the replication machinery ( Bermejo et al., 2012 ; Helmrich et al., 2013 ), which is likely a more severe problem when transcription itself is stalled. Thus, defects in coordination between DNA replication and DNA repair can lead to genomic instability, developmental and immunological abnormalities, and cancer and/or aging ( Marteijn et al., 2014 ; Zeman and Cimprich, 2014 ).

A major mechanism for rescuing stalled replication forks involves homologous recombination repair (HRR) of the resulting DSB mediated by RAD51 ( Prakash et al., 2015 ; San Filippo et al., 2008 ). HRR is essential for cell survival, and in its absence, lethal chromosome breaks occur during replication ( Sonoda et al., 1998 ). HRR is initiated by nucleolytic processing of the broken DNA ends to give single-stranded (ss) DNA tails, which become coated by the major eukaryotic ssDNA binding protein, replication protein A (RPA). RAD51 is recruited to ssDNA and loaded onto it through displacement of RPA by the breast cancer-associated protein BRCA2 ( Jensen et al., 2010 ; Liu et al., 2010 ; Thorslund et al., 2010 ) in partnership with PALB2 ( Xia et al., 2006 ). In contrast ( Roy et al., 2012 ), the breast cancer-associated protein BRCA1 functions early in HRR to regulate end resection ( Coleman and Greenberg, 2011 ) and to recruit BRCA2 through interaction with PALB2 ( Sy et al., 2009 ). The RAD51 nucleoprotein presynaptic filament catalyzes the search for homology between the ssDNA end and the intact sister chromatid, invading the duplex DNA to form a DNA joint called the D-loop in a process that also requires PALB2 and RAD51AP1 ( Buisson et al., 2010 ; Dray et al., 2010 ; Wiese et al., 2007 ). Accessory proteins including RAD52 ( Feng et al., 2011 ) and five RAD51 paralogs, XRCC2/3 and RAD51B/C/D ( Chun et al., 2013 ), are important in the critical early step of RPA displacement and RAD51 filament formation, which manifests at the cellular level as RAD51 foci.

The DNA repair protein XPG was first identified as a structure-specific endonuclease required for nucleotide excision repair (NER). Initiation of NER requires binding of XPC to the helix distortion caused by a lesion, followed by further opening of the DNA by the transcription/repair factor TFIIH to form an NER bubble, then lesion verification by TFIIH together with XPA. Sequential cuts at the bubble junctions by ERCC1/XPF and XPG excise the lesion-containing strand ( Marteijn et al, 2014 ). Transcription-coupled repair (TCR) is a specialized process that preferentially removes transcription-blocking lesions from transcribed DNA strands through recognition of stalled RNA polymerase by the CSB protein, rather than recognizing the lesion itself ( Fousteri and Mullenders, 2008 ; Vermeulen and Fousteri, 2013 ). TCR therefore does not involve XPC, but requires other NER proteins including XPG.

Defects in NER result in the skin cancer-prone, sun-sensitive disorder xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), and point mutations in XPG that inactivate its endonuclease (XP-G patients) cause XP ( Nouspikel et al., 1997 ; O’Donovan and Wood, 1993 ). In contrast, patients with rare truncating mutations in XPG have the combined diseases of XP with Cockayne syndrome (CS), the signature molecular defect of which is loss of TCR ( Emmert et al., 2002 ; Lindenbaum et al., 2001 ; Nouspikel et al., 1997 ). Rather than cancer susceptibility, XP-G/CS presents as severe, primarily postnatal, progressive neurodevelopmental abnormalities with mental retardation, dramatic growth failure, greatly accelerated symptoms of aging, and death in early childhood ( Scharer, 2008 ). Mouse models recapitulate the patient phenotypes. The original Xpg knockout resulted in death before weaning ( Harada et al., 1999 ), but a recent conditional knockout mouse in a hybrid strain background survives to 15–18 weeks and displays many progressive progeroid features, including early cessation of growth, cachexia, kyphosis, and extensive neurodegeneration ( Barnhoorn et al., 2014 ). In striking contrast, mice with point mutations inactivating XPG enzymatic activity are UV sensitive but otherwise normal ( Shiomi et al., 2004 ; Tian et al., 2004 ), similar to XP-G patients. Thus, distinct from its NER incision function, XPG is essential for normal postnatal development in mammals. However, the nature of this requirement has been unclear.

XPG has multiple non-enzymatic functions outside its role in NER that might contribute to the fatal postnatal phenotype associated with its loss. It interacts directly with both RNA polymerase II and the CSB protein that is essential for initiation of TCR, and it has been implicated in early steps of TCR ( Sarker et al., 2005 ) beyond its requirement for repair per se . In addition, XPG forms a complex with TFIIH and has been reported to be important for its stable association with the CAK kinase subunit ( Ito et al., 2007 ). XPG also has a role in the early steps of base excision repair (BER) of oxidative DNA damage through direct interaction with, and stimulation of, the NTH1 glycosylase ( Klungland et al., 1999 ; Weinfeld et al., 2001 ).

To better understand the critical postnatal function(s) of XPG, we undertook a series of biochemical and cell biological studies directed toward identifying other protein partners of XPG and elucidating the consequences of its absence. Our unexpected findings establish XPG as a member of the HRR pathway whose loss results in an inability to recover from replication stress, leading to DNA damage and genomic instability. These results suggest a basis for the hitherto unexplained, unusually severe phenotypes of Xpg knockout mice and, importantly, of XP-G/CS patients.

DISCUSSION

Our work reveals an unexpected, multi-faceted function for XPG in HRR that is clearly distinct from its role in NER. Specifically, we show that XPG forms a higher-order complex with BRCA2, PALB2, RAD51 and DSS1, that it also interacts with BRCA1, and that loss of XPG leads to a significant reduction of HRR. The reduced HRR reflects decreased RAD51 foci formation caused by decreased chromatin binding of RAD51, BRCA2, and PALB2. The deleterious cellular consequences observed upon XPG depletion are consistent with its requirement in HRR. These include increased pRPA32 signaling, DSB formation, G2/M accumulation, and sensitivity to the crosslinking agent MMC, the Topoisomerase I inhibitor CPT, and PARP inhibition. Furthermore, stalled replication forks accumulate dramatically upon XPG depletion, correlating with induction of genomic instability as marked by chromatid breaks and micronuclei even in otherwise undamaged cells.

The observed effects of XPG loss on RAD51, BRCA2, and PALB2, together with its direct interactions with each of these proteins, suggest that XPG functions in HRR as a recombination mediator to facilitate presynaptic filament formation. It is perhaps important in this context that XPG interacts directly with RPA through an acidic region in the XPG spacer domain ( He et al., 1995 ), and that the spacer also contains a ubiquitin binding motif (UBM) ( Hofmann, 2009 ). The biological relevance of the XPG interaction with RPA has primarily been viewed in the context of NER, where the interaction may assist in coordinating DNA re-synthesis with XPG incision ( Fagbemi et al., 2011 ). However, since ubiquitylated RPA is involved in regulating repair at stalled replication forks ( Elia et al., 2015b ), it is possible that the interaction is also functionally important for localizing XPG to stalled replication forks and/or for coordinating RPA removal in complex with BRCA2/PALB2/DSS1.

The interpretation that XPG functions as an additional recombination mediator, while consistent with most of our observations, would not predict its effects on BRCA1. BRCA1 is phosphorylated by ATM and ATR in response to damage or replication stress respectively, and the phosphorylation is important for BRCA1 focal localization ( Cortez et al., 1999 ; Tibbetts et al., 2000 ). However, little is known about subsequent regulatory steps, including the mechanism of BRCA1 dephosphorylation or consequences of its failure. XPG involvement in regulating BRCA1 activity, perhaps by promoting phosphatase action, is strongly suggested by the striking hyperphosphorylation, increased foci formation, and persistent chromatin binding of BRCA1 when XPG is lost. It is even possible that the downstream effects of XPG loss on RAD51 foci formation and HRR are simply an indirect consequence of its requirement for regulating BRCA1 function. However, the multiple downstream protein-protein interactions of XPG would be difficult to reconcile with this view. We therefore favor the possibility that XPG has two distinct functions in HRR, one in the initiation step through regulatory effects on BRCA1 and another through direct participation in RAD51 presynaptic filament formation with BRCA2 and PALB2.

The most well-understood function of XPG is its required role as the 3′ endonuclease in NER and transcription-coupled NER (TC-NER). However, several lines of evidence strongly suggest that the dramatic BRCA-like phenotype upon loss of XPG as reported here is separable from this role. In support of this idea, depletion of XPC or XPA, which also block NER or both NER and TC-NER respectively, did not increase DSBs or genomic instability. Furthermore, there are strong biological arguments supporting a critical non-enzymatic role for XPG. Data from both mouse models and human patients establish that while XPG is required for normal postnatal development, its endonuclease activity is not. In both cases, inactivating point mutations cause only UV sensitivity, whereas knockouts (mouse) or truncations (patients) cause the severe CS phenotype and very early death ( Barnhoorn et al., 2014 ).

We suggest that, independently of its catalytic activity, XPG functions as a scaffold protein at multiple steps in HRR. However, we have been unable to rescue the HRR defect in either XP-G/CS patient cells or siRNA knockdowns by ectopic expression of WT XPG cDNA (e.g., Figure S1F , lanes 3,4), despite the fact that the NER defect is complemented ( Ellison et al., 1998 ; Staresincic et al., 2009 ). There are several possible explanations for this observation. Notably, native XPG expression is apparently tightly regulated and responds to replication stress ( Fig. 4A,B ), and it is possible that this regulation is critical for its HRR function. Furthermore, XPG protein is heavily post-translationally modified, including multiple phosphorylations, ubiquitination, and likely sumoylation ( Elia et al., 2015a ). A lack of UTR sequences in ectopic expression may result in the dysregulation of RNA-mediated cotranslational protein modifications ( Kramer et al., 2009 ). In addition, there are at least three protein coding isoforms of XPG/ERCC5 (GENCODE build 19 and later, http://gencodegenes.org ) plus a gene-merge transcript, BIVM-ERCC5, of unknown function. Thus, ectopically expressed XPG, although active as an endonuclease, may lack some properties that are critical for its homeostasis and scaffolding functions. Of note, inability to rescue knockdowns by ectopic expression is not without precedent and has recently been observed by us in HRR for the NUCKS1 protein ( Parplys et al., 2015 ). Notwithstanding the failure of ectopically expressed XPG to complement phenotypes other than those related to NER incision, the biology of different classes of XPG mutations (inactivating point mutations vs. truncations or deletions) in human patients and in mouse models argues very strongly that XPG has critical functions distinct from its endonuclease activity. Our results as reported here strongly suggest that the XPG role(s) in HRR and in replication fork restart are one such function.

The result of XPG depletion is an approximate 50% reduction in HRR that was consistently observed for several different end points. However, the induction of DSBs, genomic instability, and stalled replication forks when XPG is depleted greatly exceeds that expected from a two-fold decrease in HRR. These discrepancies suggest that other functions of XPG, in addition to the new HRR role(s) described here, likely contribute to genomic stability and replication fork maintenance.

One possibility is that XPG plays an additional role either in replication fork protection or reversal. It is now clear that elaborate mechanisms exist for protecting replication forks that have encountered blocks and for restoring their progress. These mechanisms operate prior to the crisis state of collapse and DSB induction, after which HRR is clearly required. They include protection from excessive resection/degradation, which involves non-HRR functions of both BRCA1 and BRCA2 ( Schlacher et al., 2011 ; Schlacher et al., 2012 ). Replication fork reversal to form a “chicken-foot” structure is also central to avoiding fork breakage and allowing replication restart, and it is mediated by RAD51 in a role outside of its recombinase function ( Zellweger et al., 2015 ). Processing of reversed forks to allow replication restart requires WRN protein ( Thangavel et al., 2015 ), and a non-enzymatic function of WRN has been implicated in protecting nascent DNA upon fork stalling ( Su et al., 2014 ). Since we show that XPG interacts directly with BRCA1, BRCA2, and RAD51, and since it also has a direct, functional interaction with WRN ( Trego et al., 2011 ), one possibility to explain the extreme accumulation of stalled forks when XPG is lost is that it additionally serves as an important co-factor in one or more of these processes.

Another possibility that must be considered relates to the recent demonstration that the presence of XPG endonuclease activity in cells lacking various RNA processing factors causes extensive DSB formation and genomic instability from cleavage of R-loops ( Sollier et al., 2014 ), which are RNA-DNA hybrids with displaced ssDNA that can form behind transcription. However, we show the opposite: DSBs – presumably at stalled replication forks – and genomic instability are caused by loss of XPG. It is presently unclear whether XPG processes R-loops under normal conditions (i.e. in the presence of RNA processing factors), and if so whether such cleavage is beneficial or deleterious. It is possible that, in the absence of XPG, unprocessed R-loops could lead to DSBs when encountered by replication forks. In this context it is interesting that R-loop cleavage by XPG also requires the TCR protein CSB ( Sollier et al., 2014 ), whose activity is increased by interaction with XPG ( Sarker et al., 2005 ). Loss of either XPG or CSB would therefore both prevent TCR, leading to a dramatic increase in stalled transcription, and increase R-loop formation or persistence. The combined effect could significantly increase replication fork stalling – which would be poorly resolved in the absence of XPG, leading to high levels of replication stress. Thus the relationship between TCR, R-loops, replication fork stalling and collapse, and HRR is evidently complex and certainly poorly understood at present. What is now clear, however, is that XPG occupies a central position in these intertwined processes. Interestingly, CSB has recently been implicated both in recruitment of HRR proteins to oxidative damage at sites of active transcription ( Wei et al., 2015 ) and in the mitotic checkpoint and pathway choice for DSB repair ( Batenburg et al., 2015 ). Although the detailed connection between these findings for CSB and the HRR role of XPG reported here remains to be elucidated, it is increasingly evident that TCR defects in general are likely to have an impact that extends well beyond maintenance of transcription to include effects on genome stability.

In summary, we have demonstrated an unexpected, critical role for XPG in replication fork maintenance and preservation of genomic stability through participation in HRR after replication stress via direct interactions with key HRR proteins. Cell cycle defects, large numbers of DSBs, HRR defects, and elevated DNA damage response signaling ensue when cells are deprived of XPG. The severe disease presentation that manifests in patients with truncating mutations in XPG or in mouse models with deletion of Xpg has never been adequately explained and cannot be reconciled with loss of NER alone. Loss of the HRR role for XPG that is described here, and possibly of additional XPG functions in processing of stalled forks, may represent a major contributing factor in the CS phenotype. The assignment of XPG as an important player in BRCA-mediated HRR and the greatly elevated genomic instability that occurs in its absence also raise the possibility that it functions as a previously unrecognized tumor suppressor gene for breast, ovarian, and other BRCA-associated cancers.
