---
pmid: '17332504'
title: Dynamic regulation of p53 subnuclear localization and senescence by MORC3.
authors:
- Takahashi K
- Yoshida N
- Murakami N
- Kawata K
- Ishizaki H
- Tanaka-Okamoto M
- Miyoshi J
- Zinn AR
- Shime H
- Inoue N
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC1855011
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e06-08-0747
---

# Dynamic regulation of p53 subnuclear localization and senescence by MORC3.
**Authors:** Takahashi K, Yoshida N, Murakami N, Kawata K, Ishizaki H, Tanaka-Okamoto M, Miyoshi J, Zinn AR, Shime H, Inoue N
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e06-08-0747](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e06-08-0747)
**PMC:** [PMC1855011](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1855011/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 May;18(5):1701-9. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e06-08-0747. Epub 2007 
Mar 1.

Dynamic regulation of p53 subnuclear localization and senescence by MORC3.

Takahashi K(1), Yoshida N, Murakami N, Kawata K, Ishizaki H, Tanaka-Okamoto M, 
Miyoshi J, Zinn AR, Shime H, Inoue N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Molecular Biology, Osaka Medical Center 
for Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases, Osaka, Osaka 537-8511, Japan.

The tumor suppressor p53 is a key transcriptional factor regulating the 
induction of cellular senescence by oncogenic signals. The activity of p53 is 
regulated by recruitment into promyelocytic leukemia (PML)-nuclear bodies (NBs) 
as well as by stabilization through posttranslational modifications such as 
phosphorylation and acetylation. Here we found that MORC3 (microrchidia3)-ATPase 
activated p53 and induced cellular senescence in normal human and mouse 
fibroblasts but not p53-/- fibroblasts. Conversely, genotoxic stress-induced 
phosphorylation and stabilization of p53 but barely increased its 
transcriptional activity in Morc3-/- fibroblasts. MORC3 localized on PML-NBs in 
presence of PML and mediated recruitment of p53 and CREB-binding protein (CBP) 
into PML-NBs. In contrast, expression of ATPase activity-deficient mutant 
MORC3-E35A or siRNA repression of MORC3 impaired the localization of p53 and 
Sp100 but not CBP on PML-NBs. These results suggest that MORC3 regulates p53 
activity and localization into PML-NBs. We identified a new molecular mechanism 
that regulates the activity of nuclear proteins by localization to a nuclear 
subdomain.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e06-08-0747
PMCID: PMC1855011
PMID: 17332504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The tumor suppressor p53 is a key transcriptional factor regulating the induction of cellular senescence by oncogenic signals. The activity of p53 is regulated by recruitment into promyelocytic leukemia (PML)-nuclear bodies (NBs) as well as by stabilization through posttranslational modifications such as phosphorylation and acetylation. Here we found that MORC3 ( m icr orc hidia3)-ATPase activated p53 and induced cellular senescence in normal human and mouse fibroblasts but not p53 −/− fibroblasts. Conversely, genotoxic stress–induced phosphorylation and stabilization of p53 but barely increased its transcriptional activity in Morc3 −/− fibroblasts. MORC3 localized on PML-NBs in presence of PML and mediated recruitment of p53 and CREB-binding protein (CBP) into PML-NBs. In contrast, expression of ATPase activity-deficient mutant MORC3-E35A or siRNA repression of MORC3 impaired the localization of p53 and Sp100 but not CBP on PML-NBs. These results suggest that MORC3 regulates p53 activity and localization into PML-NBs. We identified a new molecular mechanism that regulates the activity of nuclear proteins by localization to a nuclear subdomain.

INTRODUCTION

Cellular senescence functions as an initial barrier to tumorigenesis in response to the activation of oncogenes ( Braig et al. , 2005 ; Chen et al. , 2005 ). Tumor suppressor proteins p53 and pRB both act in pathways that regulate the cellular senescence induced by oncogenic signals ( Serrano et al. , 1997 ; Campisi, 2005 ). The activity of p53 is modulated mostly by stabilization through posttranslational modifications, including phosphorylation and acetylation ( Bode and Dong, 2004 ). In addition to these posttranslational modifications, recruitment of p53 into promyelocytic leukemia (PML)-nuclear bodies (NBs) also plays an important role in its activation in response to genotoxic stress ( Fogal et al. , 2000 ; Pearson et al. , 2000 ). PML-NBs are highly dynamic nuclear structures containing an essential component, PML, to which many proteins are recruited to regulate transcription or DNA repair ( Borden, 2002 ). Expression of PML IV, one of the PML isoforms encoded by several alternative spliced transcripts, recruits p53 and CBP to PML-NBs, activates them and induces cellular senescence ( Pearson et al. , 2000 ). However, little is known about how p53 or other proteins are recruited into PML-NBs or other nuclear subdomains.

MORC3 ( m icr orc hidia 3 ), also called KIAA0136, ZCWCC3, and NXP-2 ( Kimura et al. , 2002 ), is a member of the MORC protein family characterized by conserved structures consisting of a GHL ( G yrase B, H sp90 and Mut L )-ATPase domain ( Dutta and Inouye, 2000 ) at the amino-terminus, a zinc finger type CW domain containing conserved four cysteines and two tryptophans ( Perry and Zhao, 2003 ), a nuclear localization signal (NLS) and coiled-coil domains at the carboxy-terminus (Supplementary Figure 1). We previously identified one of MORC family proteins, mouse Morc1 ( Inoue et al. , 1999 ), whose deficiency causes arrest of spermatogenesis before the pachytene stage of meiosis prophase I ( Watson et al. , 1998 ). There are four predicted MORC family proteins (MORC1, MORC2 [KIAA0852, ZCWCC1], MORC3, and MORC4 [ZCWCC2]) in human and five (Morc1, Morc2a, Morc2b, Morc3, and Morc4) in mice (Supplementary Figure 1 and Supplementary Table 1). The MORC family proteins belong to CW-domain–containing subfamilies I (MORC1 and MORC2) or IX (MORC3 and MORC4) ( Perry and Zhao, 2003 ). MORC1 is expressed specifically in male germ cells ( Inoue et al. , 1999 ), whereas MORC2 and MORC3 in human are ubiquitously expressed (The HUGE database, http://www.kazusa.or.jp/huge/index.html ). Caenorhabditis elegans has only one MORC family member, ZC155.3, whose knockdown by siRNA is embryonic lethal (Wormbase, http://www.wormbase.org/ ).

Although MORC family proteins are conserved in higher eukaryotes, no molecular function of any MORC family protein has yet been clarified. Here we show that MORC3 is involved in recruiting p53 and Sp100 but not PML or CBP from the nucleoplasm to PML-NBs. In addition, MORC3 regulates p53 activation in a manner dependent on MORC3-ATPase activity.
