---
pmid: '21421812'
title: APO1 promotes the splicing of chloroplast group II introns and harbors a plant-specific
  zinc-dependent RNA binding domain.
authors:
- Watkins KP
- Rojas M
- Friso G
- van Wijk KJ
- Meurer J
- Barkan A
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
pmcid: PMC3082255
doi: 10.1105/tpc.111.084335
---

# APO1 promotes the splicing of chloroplast group II introns and harbors a plant-specific zinc-dependent RNA binding domain.
**Authors:** Watkins KP, Rojas M, Friso G, van Wijk KJ, Meurer J, Barkan A
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.111.084335](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.111.084335)
**PMC:** [PMC3082255](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3082255/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2011 Mar;23(3):1082-92. doi: 10.1105/tpc.111.084335. Epub 2011 Mar
 18.

APO1 promotes the splicing of chloroplast group II introns and harbors a 
plant-specific zinc-dependent RNA binding domain.

Watkins KP(1), Rojas M, Friso G, van Wijk KJ, Meurer J, Barkan A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403, 
USA.

Arabidopsis thaliana APO1 is required for the accumulation of the chloroplast 
photosystem I and NADH dehydrogenase complexes and had been proposed to 
facilitate the incorporation of [4Fe-4S] clusters into these complexes. The 
identification of maize (Zea mays) APO1 in coimmunoprecipitates with a protein 
involved in chloroplast RNA splicing prompted us to investigate a role for APO1 
in splicing. We show here that APO1 promotes the splicing of several chloroplast 
group II introns: in Arabidopsis apo1 mutants, ycf3-intron 2 remains completely 
unspliced, petD intron splicing is strongly reduced, and the splicing of several 
other introns is compromised. These splicing defects can account for the loss of 
photosynthetic complexes in apo1 mutants. Recombinant APO1 from both maize and 
Arabidopsis binds RNA with high affinity in vitro, demonstrating that DUF794, 
the domain of unknown function that makes up almost the entirety of APO1, is an 
RNA binding domain. We provide evidence that DUF794 harbors two motifs that 
resemble zinc fingers, that these bind zinc, and that they are essential for 
APO1 function. DUF794 is found in a plant-specific protein family whose members 
are all predicted to localize to mitochondria or chloroplasts. Thus, DUF794 adds 
a new example to the repertoire of plant-specific RNA binding domains that 
emerged as a product of nuclear-organellar coevolution.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.111.084335
PMCID: PMC3082255
PMID: 21421812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Arabidopsis thaliana APO1 is required for the accumulation of the chloroplast photosystem I and NADH dehydrogenase complexes and had been proposed to facilitate the incorporation of [4Fe-4S] clusters into these complexes. The identification of maize ( Zea mays ) APO1 in coimmunoprecipitates with a protein involved in chloroplast RNA splicing prompted us to investigate a role for APO1 in splicing. We show here that APO1 promotes the splicing of several chloroplast group II introns: in Arabidopsis apo1 mutants, ycf3 -intron 2 remains completely unspliced, petD intron splicing is strongly reduced, and the splicing of several other introns is compromised. These splicing defects can account for the loss of photosynthetic complexes in apo1 mutants. Recombinant APO1 from both maize and Arabidopsis binds RNA with high affinity in vitro, demonstrating that DUF794, the domain of unknown function that makes up almost the entirety of APO1, is an RNA binding domain. We provide evidence that DUF794 harbors two motifs that resemble zinc fingers, that these bind zinc, and that they are essential for APO1 function. DUF794 is found in a plant-specific protein family whose members are all predicted to localize to mitochondria or chloroplasts. Thus, DUF794 adds a new example to the repertoire of plant-specific RNA binding domains that emerged as a product of nuclear-organellar coevolution.

INTRODUCTION

The biogenesis of the photosynthetic apparatus in chloroplasts requires a complex interplay between nuclear and chloroplast genes. The multisubunit complexes that mediate photosynthetic electron transport, ATP synthesis, and carbon fixation consist of proteins of cyanobacterial ancestry whose genes are distributed between the nuclear and chloroplast genomes. Additional nuclear genes promote the expression of genes in the chloroplast, coordinate the expression of a nuclear photosynthetic transcriptome, encode enzymes involved in prosthetic group synthesis and attachment, and mediate protein targeting and assembly (reviewed in Cline and Dabney-Smith, 2008 ; Kleine et al., 2009 ; Waters and Langdale, 2009 ; Stern et al., 2010 ). It can be anticipated that a substantial fraction of the ~3000 nuclear-encoded proteins that localize to chloroplasts contribute to the assembly and regulation of the photosynthetic apparatus. The identification and functional characterization of such proteins is an active area of research.

Phenotype-driven genetic screens have been an important means for identifying nuclear genes that are required for chloroplast biogenesis. This approach has revealed that many such genes were not derived from the chloroplast’s cyanobacterial ancestor, but rather emerged after endosymbiosis. For example, genetic analyses identified 12 nucleus-encoded proteins that are required for the splicing of one or more of the ~18 group II introns in angiosperm chloroplasts, and most of these belong to RNA binding protein families that evolved in eukaryotes (summarized in Kroeger et al., 2009 ). These proteins function combinatorially to promote the splicing of different intron subsets and are found in large ribonucleoprotein particles that include their cognate intron RNAs (reviewed in Kroeger et al., 2009 ; Stern et al., 2010 ).

In this study, we identify another chloroplast splicing factor, APO1, and we show that the plant-specific domain of unknown function that makes up the bulk of APO1 is a previously unrecognized RNA binding domain. APO1 was originally identified in a genetic screen for nonphotosynthetic mutants in Arabidopsis thaliana ( Amann et al., 2004 ). APO1 was proposed to be involved in the maturation of proteins with [4Fe-4S] ligands because apo1 mutants have reduced levels of two complexes harboring [4Fe-4S] clusters: photosystem I (PSI) and the thylakoid NADH dehydrogenase (NDH). APO1 came to our attention when we identified its maize ( Zea mays ) ortholog in a coimmunoprecipitate with the chloroplast splicing factor CAF1. We show here that Arabidopsis apo1 mutants fail to splice the second intron in the ycf3 pre-mRNA. In addition, apo1 mutants exhibit reduced petD and clpP- int1 splicing and have mild defects in the splicing of the ndhA and ndhB introns. These RNA splicing defects can account for the thylakoid protein deficiencies observed in apo1 mutants, so a direct role for APO1 in [Fe-S] cluster metabolism now seems very unlikely. We show further that recombinant APO1 binds RNA with high affinity in vitro, that DUF794, the domain of unknown function that makes up the entirety of mature APO1, harbors motifs resembling zinc fingers, and that DUF794 binds zinc. Mutagenesis of the putative zinc binding motifs disrupts zinc binding and APO1 function. The rice ( Oryza sativa ) and Arabidopsis genomes encode four proteins harboring DUF794, all of which are predicted to localize to mitochondria or chloroplasts. Thus, DUF794 represents a new example of a plant-specific RNA binding domain that functions specifically in organellar gene expression.

RESULTS

Previously, we discovered three chloroplast splicing factors (RNC1, WTF1, and WHY1) via a coimmunoprecipitation approach in which antibodies to known chloroplast splicing factors were used for immunoprecipitations from a size-enriched fraction of maize chloroplast stroma, and coprecipitating proteins were identified by mass spectrometry. Reverse-genetic and RNA coimmunoprecipitation analyses then confirmed the roles of these proteins in splicing ( Watkins et al., 2007 ; Prikryl et al., 2008 ; Kroeger et al., 2009 ). The maize ortholog of APO1, Zm-APO1, was detected in a coimmunoprecipitate with the splicing factor CAF1 (see Supplemental Figure 1 online), prompting us to consider a role for APO1 in chloroplast group II intron splicing.

CAF1 is required for the splicing of several chloroplast introns and is found in stable complexes with those introns in vivo ( Ostheimer et al., 2003 ; Asakura and Barkan, 2006 ). Among CAF1’s intron substrates is an intron in the ycf3 gene, which is required for PSI assembly ( Boudreau et al., 1997 ; Ruf et al., 1997 ). Thus, the coimmunoprecipitation of Zm-APO1 with CAF1 suggested an alternative hypothesis for the role of APO1 in PSI biogenesis: that APO1 promotes ycf3 intron splicing and that it is a defect in Ycf3 expression that underlies the PSI deficiency in apo1 mutants. The results presented below support this view.

DISCUSSION

Results presented here show that the plant-specific domain of unknown function DUF794 is an RNA binding domain harboring zinc binding motifs and demonstrate that APO1, the founding member of the DUF794 family, is required for the splicing of several group II introns in chloroplasts. These findings add a new player to the set of proteins known to promote the splicing of chloroplast introns, and they clarify the role of APO1 in PSI biogenesis. It had been proposed previously that APO1 promotes PSI accumulation by facilitating the incorporation of [4Fe-4S] clusters into PSI subunits ( Amann et al., 2004 ). However, our results show that APO1 is required for PSI accumulation due to its role in promoting the splicing of the ycf3 mRNA, which encodes a PSI assembly factor.

This revised view of APO1’s function is consistent with the observation that APO1 is associated with chloroplast nucleoids ( Amann et al., 2004 ). Several other chloroplast splicing factors are likewise associated with nucleoids (G. Friso and K.J. van Wijk, unpublished data), implying that splicing factors load cotranscriptionally on to pre-mRNAs. Our findings warrant reconsideration of the underlying biochemical basis for several aspects of the apo1 mutant phenotype. For example, apo1 mutants exhibit a reduced rate of translation elongation on the chloroplast psaA/B mRNA, which encodes PSI reaction center proteins ( Amann et al., 2004 ). Given APO1’s RNA binding activity, it now seems plausible that this reflects a direct interaction between APO1 and the psaA/B mRNA. Alternatively, Ycf3 may influence psaA/B translation by promoting the cotranslational assembly of nascent PsaA and/or PsaB proteins. Another notable aspect of the apo1 mutant phenotype is the absence of NDH and LHC1 proteins ( Amann et al., 2004 ). LHC1 subunits mediate the association of the PSI and NDH complexes into a supercomplex ( Peng et al., 2009 ). Our findings suggest a new hypothesis to explain the LHC1/NDH defects in apo1 mutants: perhaps Ycf3 is necessary to assemble the PSI/NDH supercomplex, and in the absence of Ycf3, the LHC1 and NDH proteins become unstable. Analysis of psaA/B mRNA translation and NDH and LHC1 protein levels in ycf3 mutants ( Ruf et al., 1997 ; Landau et al., 2009 ) can be used to address whether Ycf3 indeed plays these unanticipated roles. The reduced splicing of the clpP mRNA may also contribute to the protein defects in apo1 mutants, as the Clp protease complex plays wide-ranging roles in chloroplast biogenesis and homeostasis ( Kim et al., 2009 ).
