---
pmid: '16286009'
title: Slug antagonizes p53-mediated apoptosis of hematopoietic progenitors by repressing
  puma.
authors:
- Wu WS
- Heinrichs S
- Xu D
- Garrison SP
- Zambetti GP
- Adams JM
- Look AT
journal: Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.09.029
---

# Slug antagonizes p53-mediated apoptosis of hematopoietic progenitors by repressing puma.
**Authors:** Wu WS, Heinrichs S, Xu D, Garrison SP, Zambetti GP, Adams JM, Look AT
**Journal:** Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2005.09.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2005.09.029)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2005 Nov 18;123(4):641-53. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.09.029.

Slug antagonizes p53-mediated apoptosis of hematopoietic progenitors by 
repressing puma.

Wu WS(1), Heinrichs S, Xu D, Garrison SP, Zambetti GP, Adams JM, Look AT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2005 Nov 18;123(4):545-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.11.003.

In response to DNA damage, the p53 tumor suppressor can elicit either apoptosis 
or cell-cycle arrest and repair, but how this critical decision is made in 
specific cell types remains largely undefined. We investigated the mechanism by 
which the transcriptional repressor Slug specifically rescues hematopoietic 
progenitor cells from lethal doses of gamma radiation. We show that Slug is 
transcriptionally induced by p53 upon irradiation and then protects the damaged 
cell from apoptosis by directly repressing p53-mediated transcription of puma, a 
key BH3-only antagonist of the antiapoptotic Bcl-2 proteins. We established the 
physiologic significance of Slug-mediated repression of puma by demonstrating 
that mice deficient in both genes survive doses of total-body irradiation that 
lethally deplete hematopoietic progenitor populations in mice lacking only slug. 
Thus, Slug functions downstream of p53 in developing blood cells as a critical 
switch that prevents their apoptosis by antagonizing the trans-activation of 
puma by p53.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.09.029
PMID: 16286009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
